

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/381383843
Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay of its
Implementation
Article  in  BANGLADESH HISTORICAL STUDIES · June 2024
DOI: 10.59815/bhs.vol2606
CITATIONS
0
READS
16
1 author:
s. M. Rezaul Karim
University of Dhaka
2 PUBLICATIONS   0 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by s. M. Rezaul Karim on 11 March 2025.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay... 87 
 Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay of its 
Implementation 
DR. S. M. REZAUL KARIM 
Professor, Department of History, University of Dhaka. 
Abstract: From  ancient times to the colonial period, the traditional 
rights of the peasants in the land, i.e. the right of possession of the 
land from generation to generation in return for payment of rent, were 
maintained. But the traditional rights of the peasants were extinguished 
when the state declared the zamindars as the owners and proprietors 
of the land under the Permanent Settlement of 1793. Although land 
reforms were carried out several times during the colonial period, the 
ownership  and  proprietorship  of the  land  by  the  peasants  was  not 
established. Moreover, exploitation and oppression of the disenfranchised 
peasantry by the zamindars continued. The Zamindari Abolition Act 
was enacted in 1950 after the establishment of independent Pakistan 
at the end of colonial rule. In this Act, the Permanent Settlement was 
abolished   and   the   peasant's   right   to   land   ownership   and 
proprietorship  was  legally  established. Due  to  the  delay  in  the 
implementation of this act, the people were deprived of these benefits. 
This article will review the obstacles that arose in its implementation 
after  the  enactment  of  the  Zamindari  Abolition  Act. Based  on  a 
qualitative methodology, data gathered from archival documents and 
other  sources  was  used  to  write  this  paper.  The  historical  research 
approach has been used to analyse the sources. It employs primary—
such  as  government  reports,  assembly  proceedings,  newspapers, 
etc.—as well as secondary—such as books and scholarly articles. The 
paper concludes that because of the long time spent in implementing 
the Act due to the various obstacles and its impacts, mostly negative, 
on the state and society, an exploitation-free society dreamed by the 
people of East Bengal could not be established.  
Key Words: Zamindari  Abolition  Act,  Land  Revenue  Commission, 
East Bengal Provincial Legislative Council. 
Introduction  
It is a common perception that the Zamindari Abolition Act was 
passed in 1950 and it was implemented in the same year. But 
the fact was that the Bill relating to this act was passed in the 
East Bengal  Provincial Legislature  on February  16, 1950 and 
came  into  force  as  a  law  from  May  18,  1951. Acquisition  of 
interests of zamindars and other rent-receivers under this act 
Bangladesh Historical Studies, Vol. XXVI, 2021-2023, 87-102 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.59815/bhs.vol2606 
 

88 Bangladesh Historical Studies 
was completed in 1958. The processes were finally completed 
in   1964    by    compensating    all    rent-receivers   including 
zamindars, debottars, waqfs and so on.
1
 During these fourteen 
years, the implementation of the abolition of the Zamindari Act 
faced  various  obstacles.  Scholars  have  discussed  this  issue 
separately  while  writing  articles  or  books  on  other  subjects. 
Badruddin   Umar   in   his   book Permanent   Settlement of 
Bangladesh Peasant wrote that the Bill relating to this Act was 
introduced  in  April  1948  and  became  an  Act  in  February 
1950.
2
 But  the  text  mentioned  nothing  about  when  and  how 
this  Act  was  implemented. However,  Kamal  Siddiqui  in  his 
book titled Land Reforms and Land Management in Bangladesh 
and West Bengal: A Comparative Study remarked that,  
By  January  1957,  the  government,  having  won  the 
case in both the High Court and the Supreme Court, 
was  finally  in  a  position  to  proceed  with  wholesale 
acquisition. This  was  completed  by  the  middle  of 
1958.
3
   
But   he   did   not   discuss   the   obstacles   faced   in   the 
implementation of this Act and how the government overcame 
those obstacles. Kabedul Islam in his Land Revenue System of 
Bangladesh 1947 to 2000, dealt with land reforms, acquisition 
of  ownership  interests  of  middlemen  or  rent-receivers  and 
payment of compensation, rate and method of compensation, 
determination   of   ceiling   system,   form   of   tenancy,   and 
discussed in   detail   about   land   revenue,   rent,   and   land 
development  tax.
4
 But  he  did  not  discuss  when  and  how  the 
Act  was  implemented  and  what  were  the  hurdles  faced  in 
implementing  the  Act. T.  Hussain  in  his  book Land  Rights  in 
Bangladesh: Problems of Management discusses various issues 
but   he   did   not   include   the   obstacles   that   delayed   the 
implementation  process. However,  he  very  briefly  mentioned 
the case of zamindars in the Dhaka High Court and Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan.
5
 Shawkat Ali in his article entitled ‘Land 
Reform  Measures  and  Their  Implementation  in  Bangladesh’ 
very  briefly  mentioned  the  case  of  zamindars  in  Dhaka  High 
Court and Supreme Court of Pakistan but did not explain it in 

Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay... 89 
detail.
6
 This research will examine the  obstacles that delayed 
the implementation  process  of  the Act.  This  article  has  been 
written  on the  basis  of  a  qualitative  approach,  under  which 
data  collected  from  documents  and  other  sources  have  been 
used. The sources have been analyzed following the historical 
research  method. Following  the  historical  method,  it  uses 
primary  documents, e.g., Assembly  Proceedings,  Government 
Reports,  newspapers, and  secondary  sources,  e.g.,  books, 
scholarly articles, etc. 
Background of the Zamindari Abolition Act 
One of the electoral promises of the Muslim League in the 1946 
election   was   to   abolish   the   zamindari   system   without 
compensation. The   Muslim   League   won   the   election   and 
formed   the   government. After   the   establishment   of   the 
independent  state  of  Pakistan  in  1947,  there  was  intense 
pressure  on  the  Muslim  League  government  to  enact  and 
implement  legislation  to abolish  the zamindari  system,  both 
from inside and outside the East Bengal Provincial Legislative 
Council. But as the Muslim League was a landlord-dominated 
political party, it adopted a slow-walk policy in introducing the 
Zamindari Abolition Act.   
There was constant pressure on the government to abolish the 
zamindari system. In addition, due to the involvement of vote 
politics,  the  demands  of  the  peasant  community  for  the 
abolition  of  zamindari  became  highly  important.
7
 In  this 
situation, on April 10, 1947, the government introduced a bill 
in  the  Bengal  Provincial  Legislature  under  the  name  'Bengal 
State  Acquisition  and  Tenancy  Bill,  1947'. But  the  League 
Government did not proceed to pass the Bill in  the Assembly 
on  the pretext  that  it  would  not  be  possible  to  carry  out  the 
proceedings of the Legislative Council due to the preoccupation 
of the British rulers with the complicated plans of the transfer 
of power and partition of the country. 
In this situation, the Tebhaga Movement on the one hand and 
the  political  leaders  including  the  elected  members  on  the 

90 Bangladesh Historical Studies 
other, put  tremendous pressure on the government to abolish 
the zamindari system. Considering the overall situation, a Bill 
named 'East Bengal State Acquisition and Tenancy Bill, 1948' 
was raised in the East Bengal Provincial Legislature on April 7, 
1948. The Bill was referred to a Select Committee. Among the 
45  members  of  this  Select  Committee,  20  were  zamindars.
8
 
Although  the  Select  Committee  was  formed,  the  Bill  did  not 
make  any  progress,  mainly  because  the  landlord-dominated 
Muslim League was maneuvering to protect the interests of the 
landlords. Then, the Muslim League government re-introduced 
the  Bill  in  the  East  Bengal  Provincial  Legislative  Council  on 
December 13, 1949.
9
  
After   re-introducing   the   Bill   in   the   Provincial   Legislative 
Assembly,  the  members  of  the  Assembly  participated  in  the 
discussion  and engaged  in heated arguments for and against 
the  abolition  of  the  zamindari  system. The  intention  of  the 
zamindar-influenced  Congress  members  who  opposed  the 
abolition  of  the  zamindari  system  argued,  firstly,  to  maintain 
the zamindari system at any cost and secondly, to try their best 
to  obtain  additional  privileges  for  the  zamindars  if  they 
ultimately failed to preserve the zamindari system. They argued 
that the acquisition of zamindari would not be possible, as it 
would create many complications. It will also not be possible to 
formulate a policy for determining compensation. They were of 
the  opinion  that  at  first  the rules  and  procedures  for  the 
gradual acquisition of zamindari and compensation should be 
formulated,  and  then  this  legislative  initiative  should  be 
taken. They   also   argued   that   the   implementation   of   the 
legislation enacted through this bill would make it difficult for 
low-income rent-receivers to survive in society. The land under 
the  control  of  the  zamindar  was  his  personal  property. The 
Congress   members   requested   the   government   to   provide 
adequate  compensation  to  the  zamindars.  The  basis  of  their 
statement   was,   firstly,   that   all   rent-receivers   were   not 
zamindars,  so  there  was  no  need  for  a  zamindari  abolition 
law. Secondly,   the    proposed   legislation    would   increase 
compensation. They requested the government to increase the 

Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay... 91 
proposed  compensation  for  the  property  acquired  by  the 
zamindars.
10
 It was evident from their statement that the main 
objective of the zamindar-influenced Congress party members 
was to protect the interests of the zamindars. 
The  members  of  the  Legislative  Council,  who  were  in favor  of 
the abolition  of  the  zamindari  system,  argued  that  the  Bill 
should    be    passed    to    abolish    the    zamindari    without 
compensation  as  per  the  election  promise.  However,  some  of 
the ruling party's Muslim zamindar-influenced members were 
in  favor  of  paying  compensation for  the  abolition  of  the 
zamidari. They were of the opinion that the acquisition of land 
of  zamindars  or  jotdars  without  compensation  would  be 
unfair. Some of them advised the government to acquire land 
with  a  small  compensation  for  more  crop  production  and 
distributing  the  acquired  land  among  the  landless  tenants.
11
 
That was, firstly, they supported the abolition of the zamindari 
system   and   by   acquiring   the   zamindari   with   a   small 
compensation  and  distributing  the  land  among  the  landless 
people.   After   a   long discussion,   the   East   Bengal   State 
Acquisition  and  Tenancy  Bill  was  passed  by  the  East  Bengal 
Provincial Legislature on February 16, 1950.
12
 Through a long 
legal process, the Bill became the East Bengal State Acquisition 
and Tenancy Act, 1950 or the Zamindari Abolition Act, and the 
Act came into effect on May 18, 1951.
13
  
Obstacles  in  Implementation  of  the  Zamindari  Abolition 
Act: The  Zamindari  Abolition  Act  was  not  implemented  till 
1964. Various obstacles arose in this process and could not be 
overcome quickly. These were:   
The Muslim League Government’s Slow-moving Policy 
It took a long time to enact legislation abolishing the zamindari 
system  due  to  the  Muslim  League  government’s  policy. The 
government adopted a slow-moving policy in the implementation 
of this law. After the Zamindari Abolition Act was enacted, the 
government did not take any initiative to implement it for a long 
time. Although the Bill to abolish zamindari was passed in the 

92 Bangladesh Historical Studies 
East  Bengal  Provincial  Legislature  in  February  1950,  the 
consent of the Governor General was not received until March 
1951.  Basically,  it  was  difficult  to  implement  the  Zamindari 
Abolition Act during the Muslim League government. On March 
10, 1951, Mother Box, a member of the East Bengal Provincial 
Legislature, remarked: 
The zemindari system would be abolished, but a long 
time has since been passed, we have taken no action 
as yet. This delay has made the people question the 
bona  fide of  our  government.  Really  if  we  mean 
business,  we  should  have  abolished  zemindari  long 
ago. But I do not know what is standing in the way of 
the government in the execution of this scheme when 
we find that proprietors after proprietors are coming 
with  prayers  for  surrendering  their  estates  to  the 
government for management by the Court of Wards. 
If there is any bona fide intention of the government 
regarding the abolition of zemindari, the government 
should have availed of this opportunity for taking all 
these estates under the management of the Court of 
Wards.  Moreover,  besides  acquisition,  this abolition 
requires   some   sort   of   set-up   in   the   official 
administration.  We  find  nothing  in  this  respect.  I 
would  submit  that  such  action  on  the  part  of  the 
Government has really led the people to question the 
bona fide of the Government regarding the abolition 
of the Zemindari.
14
  
Litigation Moved by the Zaminders 
With  the  fall  of  the  East  Bengal  Muslim  League  government 
after  the  election  of  1954,  the  newly  formed  United  Front 
Government took initiatives to implement the Act quickly. Due 
to  the  case  of  the zamindars  of  East  Bengal,  the  government 
could not implement the Act. On April 2, 1956, when the East 
Bengal  government  published  a  gazette  notice  to  acquire  the 
zamindari, the zamindar of Muktagachha Aat Ani Raj Estate in 
Mymensingh
15
 and 83 other zamindars filed a writ petition in 
the Dhaka High Court challenging the validity of the Zamindari 
Acquisition Act and the amendment ordinances of 1956. In this 
writ  suit,  the  government  sought  a  direction  to  quash  the 

Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay... 93 
Gazette Notification of April 2, 1956 and stay in possession of 
the  zamindari  till  the  final  disposal  of  the  suit. On  April  13, 
1956, the hearing of the writ case filed by 84 zamindars began 
in the Dhaka High Court. In the hearing, Barrister Siddharth 
Roy,  who  came  from  Kolkata  on  behalf  of  the  petitioner 
zamindars, said that according to the system of governance of 
Pakistan, a 'Writ of Mandamus' should be issued with the order 
to  cancel  the  notification  published  in  the  Additional  Dhaka 
Gazette on April 2, 1956, regarding the ownership of zamindari 
rent  and  occupation  of khasmahal lands because  the  East 
Bengal  State  Acquisition  and  Tenancy  Act  of  1950  is  against 
Article   5   of   the   Fundamental   Rights   Chapter   of   the 
Constitution  of  Pakistan  enacted  in  1956. The  article  states 
that all citizens are equal in the eyes of the law and are entitled 
to equal protection under the law. The lawyer argued that a law 
that differentiates one citizen from another was against the rule 
of law. On the other hand, Dhaka's prominent lawyer, Advocate 
B. A. Siddiqui filed 14 more petitions in court challenging the 
validity  of  the  notification  dated  April  2,  1956,  on  the  above 
grounds and additional grounds against encroachment of the 
waqf estate. Showing   the   same   argument,   Barrister   Abu 
Sayeed  Chowdhury  filed  more  than  50  petitions  in  court, 
raising   the   validity   of   the   said   provincial   government 
circular. Barrister Chowdhury argued on behalf of several waqf 
estates  that  acquiring waqf property  by  the  government  was 
illegal  under  Article  XVIII  of  the  Fundamental  Rights  of  the 
Constitution of Pakistan.
16
 
After the hearing, on April 24, 1956, a double bench consisting 
of Chief Justice Amin Uddin Ahmed and Justice Hasan of the 
Dhaka High Court issued an interim injunction to prevent the 
government  from  acquiring  the  rent-collecting  rights  and 
special   lands   of   the   zamindari   in   accordance   with   the 
notifications  of  the  provincial  government  on  April  2  and  13, 
1956, and the case was dismissed. The bench issued a ruling 
directing the provincial government, the Finance Secretary and 
Revenue  Department  (Land  Revenue Branch)  to  show  cause 
within 21 days as to why a 'writ of mandamus' should be issued 

94 Bangladesh Historical Studies 
to  quash  the  zamindari  acquisition  notification  published  in 
the  Additional  Dhaka  Gazette. In  this  situation,  on  April  13, 
1956,  following  the  order  of  the  High  Court,  the  previously 
announced  radio  speech  of  the  Minister  of  Land  Acquisition 
Department  was  cancelled.
17
 On  April  14,  1956,  the  Chief 
Minister   of   East   Bengal   told   reporters   that   as   per   the 
government's  notification  dated  2  April  1956,  Dhaka  High 
Court  1956,  although  the  order  issued  on  April  13  did  not 
reach   the   hands   of   the   East   Bengal   government,   the 
government decided to stop the acquisition of zamindari in East 
Bengal.  On June  11,  1956, the hearing of the zamindari writ 
started  in  the  special  bench  consisting of  Chief  Justice  Amin 
Uddin   Ahmed,   Justice   Ispahani   and   Justice   Hamudur 
Rahman. It  should  be  noted  that  on  April  13,  1956,  the 
provincial    government    stopped    taking    ownership    and 
occupying khas land due to an interim injunction of the Dhaka 
High Court on the application of the landlords.
18
 
Constitutional Barriers 
About  100  zamindars  filed  a  writ  petition  in  the  Dhaka  High 
Court on April 13, 1956, challenging the validity of the provincial 
government's  zamindari  acquisition  notice.  Advocate  General 
S.N.  Baker,  the  famous  British  Mr.  D.N. Preet,  former  law 
minister of Pakistan A.K. Brohi presented arguments on behalf 
of the provincial government. On the other hand, the eminent 
advocate  of  Patna  High  Court  Shri  P.  R.  Das  (brother  of 
Deshbandhu Chitta Ranjan Das), Barrister Shri Ashok Sen of 
Calcutta  High  Court,  Barrister  Siddharth  Roy,  Barrister  Abu 
Sayeed Chowdhury and Barrister B.A. Siddiqui of Dhaka High 
Court.  Shri  P.R.  Das  argued  on  behalf  of  the  zamindars  that 
the   Zamindari   Abolition   Act   was   anti-establishment   and 
offensive. He placed the following explanations to validate his 
point:
19
 (a) this act provides for the confiscation of property but 
not  in  the  public  interest  which  can  be  called  a fraud  direct, 
and (b)  the  Act  was  contrary  to  Article  5  of  the  Constitution. 
This article states that all citizens were equal in the eyes of the 
law  and  all  were  entitled  to  be  protected  by  the  law. On 

Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay... 95 
February 29, 1956, the repealed Acts were declared valid. But 
it  did  not  apply  to  Article  5  of  the  Constitution. It  was  not 
possible to do anything contrary to Article 5 of the Constitution. 
In  this  connection,  Shri  Das  further  said  that  this  act  could 
have  been  saved  by  amending  this  article  in  the  presence  of 
two-thirds of the members of the council. Sections 3 and 37 of 
the  Zamindari  Acquisition  Act  were  repugnant  to  Article  5  of 
the Constitution. Section 3 of this act was anti-constitutional 
for two reasons - (i) it has the power for the government to issue 
notices of acquisition of zamindari to any zamindar at will and 
indiscriminately, and (ii) there was scope for taking discriminatory 
measures also on the question of time in issuing such notices 
by  the  government. Das  explained  the  matter  in  more  detail 
and  said  that  if the  government  so  desired,  it  could  issue  a 
notice of acquisition of middle title and possession of khas land 
to  one  person  in  1951  and  another  in  1956.  As  a  result,  the 
latter could easily enjoy the property rights for five years. But 
the  previous  person would  be  deprived  in  this  regard. The 
government  also  had  the  power  not  to  give  any  notice  to  the 
latter  under  this  section. Therefore,  it  is  clearly  proved  to  be 
biased towards the interests of the said persons. It is prohibited 
in Article 5 of the Constitution. The experienced lawyer referred 
to two judgments of the Supreme Court of the United States- 
the Chinese Laundry Case and the Baltimore Case. These two 
cases were mentioned only to prove that it was wrong for the 
council  to  grant  the  authority  a  law that  was  blatant  and 
favoritist. But Section 3 of the said Act has scope for this and 
the  said  section  did  not  mention  how  the  authority  would 
work. He   explained   specifically   about   Section   37   of   the 
Zamindari Abolition Act and said that this section mentions 8 
types of compensation. But it was contrary to the idea of equal 
rights for all in the eyes of the law mentioned in the regime.
20
 
In this context, he referred to the issue of the Land Reforms Act 
of  Uttar  Pradesh,  India. He  said  that  the  Uttar  Pradesh Land 
Reforms Act provides for equitable compensation and it was 8 
times  the  value  of  the  encroached  land. Additionally,  the  act 
also  provides  for  rehabilitation  allowances  for  landlords. Shri 
Das  further  said  that  although  the  law  does  not  provide  any 
prohibition in favor of class division in any case, in the case of 

96 Bangladesh Historical Studies 
such class division, there must be good reasons consistent with 
the   main   objective   of   the   law. This   distinction   could   be 
accommodated  if  compensation  was  provided  based  on  the 
value  of  the  land and  the  size  of  the  holding. According  to 
Section 37 of the Act, the difference in compensation based on 
the net income of the individual could not be valid.
21
 
The Act was not justified as it provides for the encroachment of 
waqf estates. According to Article 18 of the Constitution, read 
with Article 25 on Directive Principles of the Constitution, the 
government  was  bound  to  protect waqfs and  other  religious 
institutions. However,  the  zamindari  act  has  provided  for  the 
eviction  of all  these  institutions. According  to  him,  all waqf 
properties   belong   to   the   creator   of   the   world. Therefore, 
according  to  the  Zamindari  Abolition  Act,  although  it  was 
possible  to  take  possession  of  people's  property,  the  creator 
who  owns  the waqf property could  not  be  classified  as  the 
owner. According   to   the   constitution,   the   citizens   of   the 
country  could  manage  the  places  of  worship  and  institutions 
according  to  their  religious  beliefs. In  view  of  the  above 
situation,   possession   of waqf property   was   against   the 
constitution.
22
  
Barrister Ashok Sen presented the statement on behalf of the 
other six petitioners. Mr. Sen criticized Provincial Government 
Ordinance No. 3 of 1956. This ordinance ordered the provincial 
government to take over the rest of the zamindaris.
23
 He stated 
that  the  Ordinance  No.  3  of  the  Provincial  Government  on 
March  22,  1956, was  not  properly  promulgated because  the 
permission  of  the  Governor  General  was  not  taken  earlier  for 
this. He  said  that  this  ordinance  was  against  the  rule  of 
law. Because   whatever   the   ordinance   was,   it   must   be 
consistent with the constitution.
24
 
Appeal against the Verdict of the High Court 
From June 11 to June 22, 1956, the hearing of the East Bengal 
zamindari acquisition writ lasted for 10 days. After the hearing, 
the  Dhaka  High  Court  verdict  was  suspended. On  August  7, 
1956,  the  Special  Bench  of  the  Dhaka  High  Court  gave  its 
verdict on the famous Zamindari Abolition writ. Chief Justice 

Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay... 97 
Amin  Uddin  Ahmed  read  out  the  173-page  verdict  for  five 
hours.  The  High  Court  declared  the  Zamindari  Abolition  Act 
and   subsequently   the   Governor's   amending   ordinances 
valid. The other petitions against government notices regarding 
khas land  included  in Waqf
25
 and Devottar
26
 properties,  the 
Special Bench declared  the above notice regarding possession 
of khas land   null   and   void. The   judgment   directed   the 
government  to  release  the khas lands  of devottar and waqf 
estates. The court stated that the government could legally take 
over all other properties except the khas land of devottar and 
waqf estates.
27
  
The  zamindars  applied  to  the  Dhaka  High  Court  to  suspend 
possession of the zamindari for another two weeks. The judges 
dismissed  their  appeal  but  allowed  them  to  appeal  to  the 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan. It  was  said  that  through  the 
Zamindari  Abolition  Act,  the  government  has  established  the 
rights  of  the  subjects  by  taking  over  the  zamindari  and 
eliminating   the   middleman. After   the   judgment   in   the 
zamindari usurpation case on 7 August, 1956, the Minister of 
Revenue  and  Zamindari  Expropriation  Department  of  East 
Pakistan   announced   that   the   notification   issued   by   the 
government  on  2  April, 1956, for  taking  over  the  whole 
zamindari of the province would come into effect immediately 
after the publication of the judgment.
28
 On August 9, 1956, the 
zamindars  filed  several  petitions  in  the  Special  Bench  of  the 
Dhaka High Court to stop the government from acquiring the 
right to collect rent. That is, the notice that was given on April 
2, 1956, by abolishing the mediation of the province, to order 
the  provincial  government  to  refrain  from  acting  accordingly, 
the lawyers N. C. Nandi and Abu Sayeed Chowdhury submitted 
an application on behalf of 65 zamindars.
29
 Then on August 15, 
1956, the Dhaka High Court issued an order to the provincial 
government to refrain from accepting all types of rent-receiver 
rights  until  October  25,  1956,  under  the  East  Bengal  Land 
Acquisition  and  Tenancy  Ordinance. The  court  issued  the 
above  'Set  Order'  as  per  the  petition  filed  by  the  zamindar 
seeking time to appeal to the Supreme Court.
30
  

98 Bangladesh Historical Studies 
Appeal to the Supreme Court 
On January 17, 1957, the Full Bench of the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan  rejected  all  appeals  challenging  the  validity  of  the 
Zamindari   Abolition   Act.   All   these   petitions   sought   the 
annulment of various notifications issued by the Government 
of  East  Pakistan  for  usurpation  of  rent-receivers  rights. All 
appeals  were  dismissed  by  the  Full  Bench  of  the  Supreme 
Court.  This  judgment  dismissed  all  appeals  challenging  the 
legality of zamindari acquisition and thereby removed the last 
obstacle  to  the  government  acquisition  of  zamindari.
31
 An 
editorial published in the Daily Ittefaq dated January 19, 1957, 
titled ‘Zamidari Occupation’ stated that this judgment removed 
all legal restrictions on the Zamindari Abolition Act. The entire 
country greeted this verdict with joy. The fate of the crores of 
countrymen   was   intertwined   with   this.   The   feudal   land 
distribution  system  was  the  biggest  obstacle  to  the  economic 
progress  of  agrarian  East  Pakistan. Ownership  of  land  by  a 
handful  of  individuals  and  unlimited  exploitation  over  the 
peasants    impoverished the  entire  country.  The  zamindari 
system was responsible for all the miseries of the masses. The 
people of the country hoped that this judgment will put an end 
to  it  and  the  socio-economic  development  of  the  country  will 
accelerate.
32
 
Zaminders again   appealed   against   the   judgment   to   the 
Supreme Court dated May 12, 1959, protesting the issuance of 
the Waqf property   acqure   order   of   the   East   Bengal 
government.
33
 Hearing of this appeal was held with full bench 
of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan. The  bench  was  formed  by 
Chief   Justice   Mohammad   Munir,   Justice   Shahabuddin, 
Justice  A.  R.  Cornelius,  Justice  Amir  Uddin  Ahmed,  Justice 
Mohammad  Sharif  and  Justice  S.  A.  Rahman. At  the  end  of 
hearing, the bench delivered the final judgment on this appeal 
on July 9, 1959. Justice Shahabuddin and Justice S. A. Rahman 
agreed   with   Chief   Justice   Mohammad   Munir's   written 
judgment.  Justice  A.R. Cornelius  and  Justice  Amir  Uddin 
Ahmed dissented   with   the   Chief   Justice   in   separate 

Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay... 99 
judgments. As   a   result,   the   Supreme   Court   allowed   the 
government's appeal against the order of the High Court in the 
said case on the basis of a majority.
34
 Consequently, the appeal 
of the mutawallis of the waqf property was dismissed and the 
government  was  entitled  to  take  possession  of  the waqf 
property. 
Final Judgement and Difficulties Regarding Compensation 
On  March  22,  1956,  the  government  was  entrusted  with  the 
responsibility of collecting all the previous rents and cesses of 
the acquired zamindaris. The government announced that ex-
rent-receivers  would  recover  the  arrears  of  tax  from  their  ex-
tenants  through  compromise  or  civil  courts.  The  ex-rent-
receivers can recover the remaining rent from their ex-tenants 
through compromise or civil court. As per Section 68 (E) of the 
Zamindari  Abolition  Act,  24  months  were  granted  to  the 
concerned  from  the  date  of  possession  of  the  Zamindari  to 
collect    the    corresponding    dues    or    to    effectuate    the 
decree. Later, it was claimed that the government was not able 
to  take  full  advantage  of  the  Act  due  to  the  delay  in  its 
implementation and in fact they got only a few months to file 
the  tax  collection  charges  in  the  courts. In  view  of  these 
difficulties, an Ordinance was issued amending Section 68 (E) 
of  the  Act  and  again  giving  24  months. This  Ordinance  was 
published on July 27, 1959, in the Additional Dhaka Gazette. 
An official press note issued on August 11, 1959, said that the 
attention  of  former  rent-receivers  was  being  drawn to  the 
Ordinance  to  enable  them  to  take  full  advantage  of  this 
extension  of  time  for  the  recovery  of  pre-occupation  rent 
arrears  of  zamindari  occupied  after  March  22,  1956. All  were 
informed in the official press note about the responsibility for 
arrears from the pre-zamindari occupation period.
35
 
It should be noted that the compensation for the acquisition of 
zamindari in East Pakistan was fixed at Rs 36,34,01,111. Out 
of this, the dues  of domestic zamindars  and  middlemen were 
Rs   26,40,77,226   and   the   dues of   non-resident   (foreign, 
especially resident in India) zamindars and middlemen were Rs 

100 Bangladesh Historical Studies 
9,93,23,885. A total compensation list of 35 lakh landlords and 
middlemen  was  prepared. Native  landlords  and  middlemen 
were paid cash compensation for a period of five years starting 
in 1963. Non-resident landlords and middlemen were provided 
with  compensation  in  the  form  of  non-transferable  bonds  in 
annual installments for a period of 40 years. Interest was also 
provided   at   a   rate   of   3%   per   annum. In   1962-63   the 
compensation  list  and  annual  scholarship  list  were  finally 
prepared  and  published  in  the  official  gazette. The  list  was 
handed over to the concerned District Commissioner. The final 
acquisition of all types of land was completed in 1964.
36
 Thus, 
it took a long time to implement the Act, mainly due to politics 
and litigation. 
Conclusion 
The  benefits  of  the  Zamindari  Abolition  Act  have  not  been 
realized    due    to    the    delay    in    the    formulation    and 
implementation of the Act. Various obstacles can be attributed 
to this. The most important of these obstacles was the lawsuit 
filed by the zamindars. The slow-moving policy of the Muslim 
League  government  in  East  Bengal  can  also  be  blamed  for 
this. After overcoming these obstacles, the government of East 
Bengal  was  finally  able  to  implement  the  Act  in  1964,  but 
during this period it had various effects on the society and the 
state. Finally, the people of East Bengal though dreamed that 
an  exploitation-free  society  would  be  established  after  the 
abolition of the zamindari system, it had not been materialized 
because of the long time spent in implementation process. 
Notes and References 
1.  Md.  Hafizur  Rahman  Bhuiyan, Land  Tenure  of  Greater  Mymensingh 
District  1854-1960, Unpublished  Ph.D.  Thesis,  Dhaka,  Department  of 
History, University of Dhaka, 2009, 70-71; Kabedul Islam, Land Revenue 
System  of Bangladesh  1947  to  2000,  Part  3  (Dhaka:  Mowla  Brothers, 
2003), 113. 
2.  Badruddin  Umar, Permanent  Settlement  of  Bangladesh Peasant (Dhaka: 
Mowla Brothers, 1998), 89-98. 
                                                           

Zamindari Abolition Act 1950 and Delay... 101 
 
3.  Kamal Siddiqui, Land Reforms and Land Management in Bangladesh and 
West  Bengal:  A  Comparative  Study (Dhaka:  University  Press  Limited, 
1988), 9. 
4.  Kabedul Islam, Land Revenue System of Bangladesh, 90-162. 
5.  T. Hussain, Land Rights in Bangladesh: Problems of Management (Dhaka: 
University Press Limited, 1995), 69-73 and 79-96. 
6.  Shawkat  Ali,  Land  Reform  Measures  and  Their  Implementation  in 
Bangladesh, Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir (ed.), Land Reforms in Bangladesh 
(Dhaka: Centre for Social Studies, 1981), 141-193. 
7.  See  in  detail,  Abul  Mansur  Ahmad, Fifty  Years  of  Politics  As  I  Saw  It 
(Dhaka: Khoshroz Kitab Mahal, 10th Edition, 2002), 192-194. 
8.  K. G. M. Latiful Bari (ed.), Bangladesh District Gazetteers: Jessore, Cabinet 
Secretariat Establishment Division, Government of the People’s Republic 
of  Bangladesh  (Dacca:  Bangladesh  Government  Press,  1979),  251-252; 
Major  General  (Rt.)  M.  A  Latif  (ed.), Bangladesh  District  Gazetteers: 
Patuakhali,  Cabinet  Secretariat  Establishment  Division,  Government  of 
the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, (Dhaka: Bangladesh Government 
Press, 1982), 252; Kamal Siddiqui, The Political Economy of Land Reforms 
in Bangladesh (Dhaka: Shobha Prakash, 2002), 43-44 and 116. 
9.  Assembly Proceedings, Official Report, East Bengal Legislative Assembly, 
Vol. IV, No. 5, Fourth Session, 1949-50, 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th and 
19th December, 1949 (Dacca: East Bengal Government Press, 1952), 47. 
10.  Assembly Proceedings, Vol. IV, No. 5, 1949, 47, 61-72 and 75. 
11.  Assembly Proceedings, Vol. IV, No. 5, 1949, 60-61. 
12.  Assembly Proceedings, Official Report, East Bengal Legislative Assembly, 
Vol.  IV,  No.  6,  Fourth  Session,  1949-50,  The  6th,  7th,  9th,  10th,  13th, 
14th,  15th  and  16th  February,  1950  (Dacca:  East  Bengal  Government 
Press, 1952), 135. 
13.  Talukder  Maniruzzaman, The  Bangladesh  Revolution  and  Its  Aftermath 
(Dhaka: The University Press Limited, Second impression, 2003), 7, Bari, 
District Gazetteers: Jessore, 250. 
14.  Assembly Proceedings, Official Report, East Bengal Legislative Assembly, 
Vol. V, No. 2, Fifth Session, 1951, The 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 
10th,  12th,  and  13th  March,  1951  (Dacca:  East  Pakistan  Government 
Press, 1953), 359-360. 
15.  The zamindar of Muktagachha Eight Ani Raj Estate in Mymensingh was 
Shri Jivendra Kishore Acharya Chowdhury. 
16.  The Daily Ittefaq, 14 April 1956. 
17.  The Daily Ittefaq, 14 April 1956. 
18.  The Daily Ittefaq, 15 April 1956. 
19.  The Daily Ittefaq, 15 April 1956. 
20.  The Daily Ittefaq, 12 June 1956. 
21.  The Daily Ittefaq, 12 June 1956. 
22.  The Daily Ittefaq, 13 June 1956. 
23.  The Daily Ittefaq, 13 June 1956. 

102 Bangladesh Historical Studies 
 
24.  The Daily Ittefaq, 14 June 1956. 
25.  Donation of land to an institution or individual for religious purposes is 
called Waqf. There are two types of Waqf namely (i) Waqf Lillah—Property 
donated to religious institutions for the purpose of worshiping Allah, and 
(ii) Waqf Awlad—Endowments made for the benefit of legitimate heirs. 
26.  The barren land donated by institutions or individuals engaged in Hindu 
religious work is called Devattar. 
27.  The Daily Ittefaq, 8 August 1956. 
28.  The Daily Azad, 8 August 1956. 
29.  The Daily Ittefaq, 10 August 1956; the Daily Azad, 10 August 1956. 
30.  The Daily Ittefaq, 16 August 1956. 
31.  The Daily Ittefaq, 18 January 1957. 
32.  The Daily Ittefaq, 19 January 1957. 
33.  The Daily Nazat, 13 May 1959. 
34.  The Daily Ittefaq, 10 July 1959. 
35.  The Daily Ittefaq, 12 August 1959. 
36.  Bhuiyan, Land Tenure of Greater Mymensingh District, 67-71; Islam, Land 
Revenue System of Bangladesh, Part 3, 113. 
View publication stats