Surendra Kumar Sinha CJ: These appeals are disposed of by this judgment since similar questions of law point are involved in these matters. The questions are whether the High Court acted illegally in maintaining the judgment of the Court of Settlement refusing to release the disputed property from the `Kha' list of abandoned buildings published in the supplementary gazette dated 28th April, 1986.

2. The property in question according to the appellants in civil appeal No. 10 of 2003 belonged to one Khan Mohammad Nuruddahar appertaining to CS Plot No. 327 measuring 0.18 acre and CS Plot No. 328 measuring 0.22 acre is situated in mouza Bara Maghbazar, Dhaka, who sold the same in favour of one Zafar Tehrani on 23-6-1953 Said Zafor Tehrani also purchased CS Plot No. 329 from Matilal Dey Mojumder in the benami of his wife Amina Sultana on 14-10- 1957He again purchased from the recorded owners in respect of CS Plot Nos. 325, 326 and 332 in the benami of his wife Amina Sultana and daughters Nargis Khanam and Rokeya Sultana on 23-2-1960 and 9-3-1960. Zafar Tehrani, there-after, gifted the land to his son Rafi Tehrani on 1-10-1971 who in turn gifted the same to his wife Hosne Ara Begum on 3-9-1972. Hosne Ara there-after transferred some land in favour of appellant Nos.1-6 and 8. After coming to know about the enlistment of the said property in `Kha' list, Hosne Ara and other purchasers filed a petition seeking exclusion of the said property in the Court Of Settlement. Both the Court of Settlement and High Court Division rejected their claim and declared that the buildings have been rightly enlisted in the abandoned `Kha' list.

3. In respect of other appeal filed by Abdus Sobhan, one Moriam Bapari was the CS recorded tenant of the disputed buildings. Subsequently, Sofar Uddin, Sheikh Sahed Ali and others who were the tenants took settlement from the Zaminder in 1916. Abdus Sobhan inherited the property and as he was minor when the record was prepared it has been recorded in the name of some persons who have no right or title. Abdus Sobhan instituted Title Suit No. 183 of 1972 after coming to know that the then Sub-Divisional Officer was taking attempts to take possession of the property and obtained an injunction. The property is not an abandoned property. Abdus Sobhan, thereafter, by separate deeds transferred some land in favour of Zakia Sultana and Lutful Huda on 22-7-1974. He also sold some other land in favour of Ayub Ali, Md Islam Bhuiyan and some other persons on 22-11-1973, 22-2-1973, 2-4-1974, 14-3-1974 and on other dates. They are now in possession of the same. The enlistment of the property in the abandoned `Kha' list is illegal.

4. The above facts disclose two rival claims by two sets of claimants over the same property. One set is claiming the land by way of purchase and gift from the recorded owners, and the other set is claiming by way of inheritance and then transfer by different deeds by one of the alleged heirs on the ground that he got the same exclusively by way of amicable partition. If one version is accepted then the other version cannot be believed. These two versions cannot go simultaneously. None of the groups is claiming clean title and exclusive ownership. The first group also claims benami transaction and the other group is claiming amicable partition among the co-sharers by which one co-sharer exclusively got the property and then he transferred. Under the above admitted facts, the issue which exfacie discloses is whether under the existing law the appellants in both the sets are entitled to any relief under section 7 of the Abandoned Buildings (Supplementary Provisions) Ordinance, 1985. Before dealing with the issue let us consider the submissions made by the learned Counsel of both the groups.

5. In Civil Appeal No. 10 of 2003, Mr. M Amirul Islam submits that the High Court Division erred in law in not interfering with the judgment of the Court of Settlement which refused to release of property in failing to consider that the authority released another property situated at Puran Paltan area in favour of the same owner on being satisfied that Rafi Tehrani was in Bangladesh on the day of promulgation of the Bangladesh Abandoned Property (Control, Management and Disposal) Order, 1972 (PO 16 of 1972) and therefore, the property cannot be enlisted as abandoned property. The other point canvassed by the learned Counsel is that there was always a dispute between Rafi Tehrani and Abdus Sobhan since 1972 over the property but Abdus Sobhan's claim was rejected by the trial court in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972. Whereas, in Abdus Sobhan's suit being Title Suit No. 183 of 1972 Rafi Tehrani was impleaded as defendant and this fact proves that Abdus Sobhan has no right or title in the property. On the other hand, the learned Counsel appearing for Abdus Sobhan argues that the law of abandoned property is an administrative law and under the parent law, article 7 provides a statutory notice required to be served for taking possession of the property. Similarly Rule 3(1) also requires the service of notice. Since no prior notice was served, which is a precondition for enlistment of the property in the list and the same having given the jurisdiction of the Court of Settlement, the High Court Division erred in law in not excluding the property from the list of abandoned building, inasmuch as, the Court of Settlement has limited jurisdiction to deal with the property.

6. I am not persuaded with the submissions made by the learned Counsel of both the parties, rather the submissions disentitled both the groups from any relief under section 7 of the Ordinance. The Court of Settlement on consideration of the rival claims by two groups clearly held that "the petitioner in Case No.586 of 1999 (appellant in Civil Appeal No.77 of 2003) never admitted that Rafi Tehrani possessed the case property nor this petitioner (Abdus Sobhan) has admitted in his evidence as PW 1 that Raft Tehrani ever possessed the case property. PW 1 Abdus Solihan in Case No.586 of 1988 said that he heard that Raft Tehrani lived in the Ispahani Colony. There is no Ispahani colony situated in the case property. This shows that Rafi Tehrani never lived at Maghbazar, Dhaka". These findings are based on undisputed evidence on record claimed by the respective claimants. These findings negated the claim of the claimants, inasmuch as, they are not legally entitled to any relief under section 7(1) of the Ordinance. Under the scheme of the law the Court of Settlement has no power to decide counter claims made by the parties in the similar manner a civil court can decide. In view of Sub-Section (2) of section 10, though the Court of Settlement has all trappings of a civil court - it does not possess all powers of a civil court, inasmuch as, sub-section (1) of section 10 says the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure are not applicable and it has powers of a civil court for (a) summoning witness (b) directing production of a document (c) calling for public record and (d) issuing commission for examination of witness or document, and nothing more.

7. The appellants have wrongly chosen the forum and their remedy lies elsewhere. This counter-claim irresistibly infers one conclusion that these persons or their predecessors are claiming the property on the basis of forged documents as will be evident lateron. Both the appeals are liable to be dismissed on this ground alone and in fact, there is no need for examining other points as canvassed by the learned Counsel.

8. The Ordinance of 1985 was promulgated with a view to determining any right or interest of any person relating to buildings in urban area declared as abandoned property in a summary manner whose property has been declared as such due to their temporary absence from the country and the possession of their property has been taken by the government or process of taking possession has been initiated. The procedure for releasing their property which have been wrongly declared as abandoned property have been simplified. As per law the authority will publish a list for taking or surrendering possession within specified time and thereafter, no property can be taken or given direction to surrender possession. That is to say, after the expiry of the period the authority cannot take any legal step in respect of any property for taking or surrendering possession. Even if any person is found in possession of any building in an urban area illegally, he cannot be disturbed. Two non-obstante clauses have been included in the Ordinance, one is in section 3 and the other is in section 4. It is said in section 3 that 'The provisions of this Ordinance shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.' The other clause simply it is said the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail over any other law. It has been empowered upon the authority to take possession of building notwithstanding anything contained in PO 16 of 1972 providing that:

"(a) no notice for surrendering or taking possession of any building as abandoned property shall be issued under the said Order after the (31st day of October, 1988);

(b) no building shall be taken possession of as abandoned property under the said Order except—

(i) in pursuance of a notice in any form issued thereunder at any time before the (31st day of October, 1988);

(ii) Where no such notice is issued in respect of a building, in execution of a decree or order passed by a court in a suit filed by the Government after the aforesaid date."

9. The above date has been extended from time to time and the date of taking step in that regard has long been expired. When a statute provides as non-obstante clause, the cardinal principle of the interpretation of statute is that such clause has to be read in the context of what the legislature conveys in enacting part of the provision. It ought to be ascertained at the first instance what, the enacting part of the section provides on a fair construction of words used according to the natural meaning and the non-obstante clause has to be understood as operating to set aside as no longer valid anything contained in relevant existing law which is inconsistent with the new law. The enacting part of the statute must, where it is clear, be taken to control the non-obstante clause where both cannot be read harmoniously for, even apart from such clause a later law abrogates earlier law clearly inconsistent with it. Therefore, it is used to indicate that this provision will prevail despite anything to the contrary in the provision mentioned in such a non-obstante clause. To say otherwise, this provision shall not be of any consequence. See New Ideal Engineering Works vs Bangladesh Shilpa Bank, 42 DLR (AD) 221, Vision N Khanchandi vs Vidya L Khanchandi, AIR 2000 SC 2747 and East India Commercial Co. vs Corporation of Calcutta, AIR 1998 SC 1789.

10. I would like to add in this connection that a non-obstante clause may be used as a legislative device to modify the ambit of the provision of law mentioned in the non-obstante clause or to override it in specified circumstances. The phrase 'notwithstanding anything' is used in contra-distinction to the phrase 'subject to', the latter conveying the idea of a provision yielding place to another provision or other provisions to which it is made subject. A non-obstante clause must also be distinguished from the phrase without prejudice'. A provision enacted 'without prejudice' to another provision has not the effect of affecting the operation of the other provision and any action taken under it must not be inconsistent with such other provision. Ordinarily, there is a close approximation between the non-obstante clause and the enacting part of the section and the non-obstante clause may throw some light as to the scope and ambit of the enacting part in case of its ambiguity, but when the enacting part is clear its scope cannot be cut down or enlarged by resort to non-obstante clause. Further, the wide amplitude of a non-obstante clause must be kept confined to the legislative policy and it can be given effect to, to the extent Parliament intended and not beyond the same. Therefore, while interpreting a non statute clause the court is required to find out the extent to which the legislature intended to give it overriding effect. References in this connection are cases of Union of India vs GM Kokil, AIR 1984 SC 1022; Narcotics Control Bureau vs Kishan Lal, AIR 1991 SC 558; PEK Kallini Amma vs K Devi, AIR 1996 SC 1963; Pannalal Bansilal Patil vs State of AR AIR 1996 SC 1023; Commissioner of Wealth Tax vs Trustees of HEH Nizam 's Family, AIR 1977 SC 2013 and Central Bank of India vs State of Kerla, (2009) 4 SCC 94.

11. Thus we find that the very purpose of a non-obstante clause is that the provision shall prevail over any other provision and that other provision shall not be of any consequence. To say otherwise such a clause is used to avoid the operation and effect of all controversy provisions. The word 'notwithstanding' shall be given to its full effect, and it is not a sound principle of interpretation to brush aside as submitted by Mr. M Amirul Islam, words in a statute as being surplus age. In case there is any inconsistency or a departure between a non-obstante clause and other provision, one of the objects of such a clause is to indicate that it is the non-obstante clause which would prevail over other clauses.

12. It is to be borne in mind that the Ordinance is a special law and it is promulgated for special objects for special purposes of finally determining the right or interest of any person relating to abandoned buildings situated in urban areas in a summary manner. The tribunal has given limited power - not all the powers of a civil court. The object for promulgating PO 16 of 1972 is discernible in the preamble wherein it has been stated that the provisions have been made for the control, management and disposal of property abandoned 'by certain persons who are not present in Bangladesh or whose whereabouts are not known or who has ceased to occupy or supervise or manage in person their property.  or who are enemy aliens' (emphasis given). Abandoned property means: "(1) "abandoned property" means any property owned by any person who is not present in Bangladesh or whose whereabouts are not known or who has ceased to occupy, supervise or manage in person his property, including "

13. In the definition clause the meaning of the word 'property' is given as: `(5)"property" means property of any kind, movable or immovable and includes any right or interest in such property and any debt or actionable claim, any security negotiable instrument, any right under a contract and any industrial or commercial undertaking.

14. Under the Ordinance provisions have been made for adjudication of 'abandoned buildings' by a Court of Settlement to be constituted under Section 9. In the Ordinance the word 'building' has been defined as: "(a) 'building' means any residential or other building or structure of any kind in an urban area and includes the land adjunct thereto, and the court-yard, tank, place of worship and private burial or cremation ground appertaining to such building"

15. So there is no difficulty in arriving at the conclusion that this is a special law promulgated for special purposes and there is no gainsaying to infer that the provisions of "The Bangladesh Abandoned Property (Control, Management and Disposal) Order, 1972, is genus and 'The Abandoned Buildings (supplementary Provisions) Ordinance, 1985 is species. Even after promulgation of the Ordinance, PO 16 of 1972 has not been repealed and kept alive. Under the Order of 1972, the procedure for taking over possession of any abandoned property has been provided in article 7 and the remedies by an aggrieved person has been provided in article 15, and there is also provision .for appeal or revision against any order passed under articles 7 or 15. On the other hand, the Court of Settlement has power to decide the right or interest of any aggrieved person in respect of abandoned buildings but no right of appeal or revision has been afforded to an aggrieved person against any order or judgment passed by a Court of Settlement.

16. Section 5 empowers the government to publish from time to time lists of buildings the possession of which has been taken as abandoned property and for surrendering or taking possession as abandoned property. However, no such notice is required in respect of any building of which a civil court passed a decree at any time before the publication of the lists or a suit appeal or other proceedings are pending in any court of law. The civil courts have been excluded to take cognizance of any suit for specific performance of contract in respect of any building the possession of which has been taken by the government as abandoned property, or a declaration that the building is not an abandoned property or has been vested in the government under PO 16 of 1972. Section 7 provides the remedy to the Court of Settlement within a period of one hundred and eight days from the date of publication of the lists in the official Gazette.

17. The Court of Settlement has been given no power to decide the disputed fact or title relating to the said property. The Court of Settlement can inquire into as to the abandoned character of any buildings and make such order as it deems fit declaring the building not abandoned property or a direction to hand over possession to the claimant if it is found that the possession has been taken illegally. The Court of Settlement is not a court invested with all the powers deter-mining the title of the rival claimants. It is a tribunal established to determine whether the building has been legally enlisted as abandoned property or not. See Bangladesh vs The Chairman, Court of Settlement, 17 BLD (AD) 301 = 50 DLR (AD) 93.

18. In the cases in hand admittedly there are rival claimants and therefore, the Court of Settlement has no jurisdiction to resolve the dispute of the rival claims of the parties the determination of which requires determination of title in the property. In this regard the learned Counsel of both the parties have made no effort to repel the admitted rival claims made by the parties. They consciously avoided the said point whenever their attention was drawn in that regard. Their reply is that after the order of release the parties will resolve their dispute in appropriate forum. Both the applicant groups claim deletion of buildings from the list of abandoned buildings but they did not clarify to whom the possession will be delivered. Admittedly they are not in possession of the entire buildings which they have admitted. Secondly, both the groups cannot possess the same buildings at a time. They are not claiming joint possession. When there is conflicting title over the disputed property, the remedy lies in a forum other than the one provided by the Ordinance.

19. Next point argued by Mr. M Amirul Islam is that the buildings are not being abandoned property, the claim of the government of taking possession as abandoned property is untenable. According to him, 'abandoned property' means any property owned by any person who is not present in Bangladesh or whose whereabouts is not known or who has ceased to occupy, supervise or manage in person his property including any property owned by any person who is a citizen or a State which at any time after 25th March, 1971, was at war with or engaged in military operation against Bangladesh. He submits that this condition has not been satisfied in this case, inasmuch as, the owners were all along in Bangladesh.

20. As to the question whether the owner was in Bangladesh after 25th March, 1971, will be considered later on. Now let us consider the legal matrix of the issue. Sub-section (2) of section 5 states that the lists published under sub-section (1) shall be conclusive evidence on the facts that the publication of the buildings included therein are abandoned property and have been vested in the government as such. There is no dispute that the disputed property has been enlisted in the `Kha' list. Therefore, there is presumption that the buildings have been vested in the government as abandoned property until and unless rebuttal evidence is produced by the claimants. Till the claimants can prove that they have right or interest in the property, there is conclusiveness of abandoned nature of the property. It is presumption of law. A presumption of law is a rule of law that a particular inference shall be drawn by a court of law from a particular circumstance. The rebuttable presumptions are intendments made by law, but unlike them, they only hold good until disproved.

21. In Bangladesh vs Jalil, 48 DLR (AD) 10, it has been held that section 5(2) of the Ordinance clearly provides that the lists published under sub-section (1) shall be conclusive evidence of the fact that the buildings included therein are abandoned property and have been vested in the government as such and that the government has no obligation either to deny the facts alleged by the claimant or to disclose the basis of treating the property as abandoned property merely because the same is disputed by the claimant. In Government of Bangladesh vs Ashraf Ali, 49 DLR (AD) 161, it has been held that the listing of an abandoned property either in 'Ka' or `Kha' list is not a mistake or a default of the kind that makes the lists so prepared illegal. Once a particular property has been listed either in the 'Ka' list or `Kha' list there is natural presumption that it has been duly listed. Similar views have been taken in Bangladesh vs KM Zaker, 8 BLC (AD) 27. In Hazerullah vs Chairman, 1st Court of Settlement, 3 BLC (AD) 42, it has been observed that the government is under no obligation to prove anything after the enlistment of the property and the onus is on the claimant to prove otherwise. In CQMH Md. Ayub Ali vs Bangladesh, 47 DLR (AD) 71, it has been held that a building is included in the list is proof of its being an abandoned property, and the government has nothing to prove or deny. There are catenas of decisions of this Court on this point and at this stage it is not necessary to dwell with the said point.

22. Sub-section (2) of section 5 clearly says that the lists published under sub-section (1) shall be conclusive evidence of the fact that the buildings included were abandoned property and have been vested in the government. Therefore, a heavy onus cast upon the appellants to prove that the buildings are not abandoned property. The High Court Division and the Court of Settlement on consideration of the materials on record held that the appellants have miserably failed to establish that the buildings are not an abandoned property. This apart, in the face of counter claims about the ownership of the buildings which justifies in coming to the conclusion that the appellants have been claiming the property on the basis of forged deeds, inasmuch as, two inconsistent versions cannot go together. If one version is accepted the other version is bund to fall through or the vice versa. There is no scope under the scheme of the Ordinance to determine by the tribunal that Honse Ara or Abdus Sobhan had title and possession in the property. On the question of onus, references may be made in this connection are the cases of Ministry of Works vs Abdul Jalil, 48 DLR (AD) 10, Bangladesh vs Md Jalil, 49 DLR (AD) 26, KM Zaker Hossain vs Ministry of Works, 8 BLC (AD) 27, and Hezerullah vs Chairman, 3 BLC (AD) 42.

23. Next point raised by the Counsel is that since no notice was served upon the appellants before the publication in the gazette, the listing of the buildings is illegal. There is no dispute that the property has been listed in the `Kha' list. Service of notice is required under clause (b)(1) of section 4 for surrendering or giving possession of the buildings upon the person in legal possession and the notice for surrendering possession shall have to be issued within the specific time. Law does not provide for service of notice upon any person who is not in possession of the buildings. Both the learned Counsel submit that since no notice has been issued upon the appellants, there has been violation of law. In this connection they have referred to Article 7 of PO 16 of 1972 read with Rule 3(1)(8) of the Bangladesh Abandoned Property (taking over possession Rules 1972).

24. Article 7(2) provides service of notice upon the person in possession of the property within seven days by the Deputy Commissioner or the authorized person for taking possession. Similar provision has been inserted in clause (b) of section 4 of the Ordinance with the exception that under the latter provision if the possession is to be taken such notice be issued upon him. In order to bring the case under Article 7, the appellants must prove that they are in possession of the building but if they fail to prove possession, the claim of service of notice upon them is redundant for, if they are not in possession how the government can infer that they have right or interest in the buildings. More so, section 4 is a non-obstante clause overriding the provisions contained in the President's Order 16 of 1972. The rules frames under the President's Order cannot supersede the parent law. In the premises, the High Court Division is perfectly justified in holding that the appellants are not entitled to any notice since they are not in possession of the property. In this regard, the Court of Settlement held that the question of non-service of notice required under section 4(1)(b) of the Ordinance was not challenged in the case. Similar views have been taken in Rowshan Ara vs Bangladesh, 59 DLR (AD) 165. It has been held that if the property has assumed the character of abandoned property, 'the listing of the property in question, even if without service of notice as per provision of Ordinance No.54 of 1985, is not material as the property because of non-service of notice of listing in the list of abandoned properties would not cease to be an abandoned property

25. Now turning to the merit of the case, we noticed that on behalf of the petitioners in Settlement Case No.649 of 1988 (Civil Appeal No. 10 of 2003), three witnesses have been examined, Hosne Ara Begum (PW 1), Hasina Tehrani (PW 2) and Shahidul Hoque Bhuiyan (PW 3). In support of Settlement Case No.586 of 1988 (Civil Appeal No.707 of 2003), Abdus Sobhan has been examined as PW 1. The Court of Settlement on assessment of the evidence disbelieved the claim of Hosne Ara on the question of oral gift by Zafar Tehrani to Rafi Tehrani, the possession of Rafi Tehrani, her marriage with Rafi Tehrani, her claim of possession of the buildings pursuant to oral gift, her interest in the property and her locus standi to maintain petition for release of the property and observed that she has created forged documents for the purpose of grabbing the property.

26. It was held that she did not make any statement that her alleged husband subsequently gifted the disputed property by a deed; that Hosne Ara Begum never lived with Rafi Tehrani, which is also evident from the averments in the written deed of dated 18th October, 1972-she showed her place of residence at 277/2 Azimpur Road, Lalbagh, Dhaka; that the kabin nama is a forged one in that the signature of Rafi Tehrani in it does not tally with the admitted signature of Rafi Tehrani; that Rafi Tehrani never gifted the property in favour of Hosne Ara; that the other petitioner i.e. Abdus Sobhan did not admit that Raft Tehrani possessed this property or the alienation of the property in favour of Hosne Ara; that the address of Rail Tehrani in his deposition mentioned at Gulshan and in the kabin-nama he showed his address at Ispahani Colony which is corroborated by Abdus Sobhan; that Hosne Ara stated that Raft Tehrani left for London in the last part of 1975, whereas Hasina Tehrani's deposition shows that he was in Bara Magbazar till 1975; that Hosne Ara did not produce any tax receipts which proved that the City Corporation never recognized neither Zafar Tehrani nor Rafi Tehrani nor Hosne Ara as occupant of the property; that in the petition there is no averment that Zafar Tehrani made an oral gift in favour of Rafi Tehrani; that in the kabin-nama Hosne Ara's address was shown at 277/2 at Azimpur, Lalbagh and she was residing at that address which is evident from her admission in cross-examination that during the liberation period she lived with her father; that admittedly Hosne Ara sold the property to other applicants and after such transfer she has no subsisting right, title and interest in the case property; that the transfer is hit by PO 16 of 1972, inasmuch as, she sold the abandoned property which has been vested in the government; that Abdus Sobhan admitted that Advocate Abdur Rashid went into possession in the case property immediately after the liberation of Bangladesh which proved that he was not in possession on the day of promulgation of PO 16 of 1972 ; that the property has been rightly vested in the government; that non service of notice required under section 4(1)(b) was not challenged in the petition and that the appellants have failed to rebut the presumption of genuineness of listing of the property. These are findings of fact and these findings cannot be interfered with by the High Court Division hearing a writ of certiorari under article I 02(2)(ii) of the constitution.

27. The High Court Division was conscious about its jurisdiction, even then, it has looked at the evidence and held that according to Hosne Ara, a portion of the property was purchased by Zafar Tehrani in his name and in the benami of his wife and two daughters, if that be so, Zafar Tehrani could not make oral gift of the entire property in the name of his son without declaring his exclusive title by a court of law; that the whereabouts of Zafar Tehrani and his two daughters were not disclosed; that the Court of Settlement rightly found discrepancy about the claim of Hosne Ara regarding the written gift; that the Court of Settlement was also justified in disbelieving the claim of Hosna Ara that she lived in the disputed property; that the decree obtained in the suit has been obtained by practising fraud; that once suit property has been declared as abandoned property, the onus lies upon the claimant to prove otherwise, which they failed to substantiate; that neither Hosne Ara nor Abdus Sobhan possessed the case property, and therefore, they were not entitled to any notice for surrendering possession and that in a writ certiorari the superior court cannot sit as a court of appeal over the judgment of Court of Settlement.

28. In course of hearing of the matter, learned counsel of both the parties have made arguments touching to the facts and submitted that in view of the decrees passed by civil courts, the High Court Division erred in law in not interfering with the judgment of the Court of Settlement. The submission is devoid of substance. According to Hosne Ara, CS Plot No. 329 belonged to Mati Lal MajuMd.er, who sold it to Amena Sultana by deed dated 14-10-1947 and the record was also prepared in her name. So the deed has been acted upon that she was the exclusive owner. In respect of CS Plot No.332, Fazle Ahmed Karim sold to Zafar Tehrani, Amena Sultana, Nargis Sultana and Rokeya Khanam by deed dated 23rd February, 1960. CS Plot Nos. 333 and 328, an area of 40 decimals belonged to KAM Nuru Uddin who sold the same in favour of Zafar Tehrani. So, in respect of Plot No. 329 Amena Sultana is the exclusive owner and in respect of CS Plot No.332 Amena Sultana, Nargis Sultana and Rokeya Khanam are also owners. CS Plot Nos.333 and 328 with an area of 40 decimals belonged to KAM Nuru Uddin who sold the same in favour of Zafar Tehrani. Thus, in respect of Plot No. 329 Amena Sultana is the exclusive owner and in respect of CS Plot No.332 Amena Sultana, Nargis Sultana and Rokeya Khanam are also owners. According to her, Rafi Tehrani purchased the land in the benami of his wife and daughters. Learned counsel submits that Amena Sultana died in the meantime and Raft Tehrani being the only son inherited her property. This claim is not sustainable since she left behind two daughters. Whether the property was purchased by Zafar Tehrani in the benami of his wife and daughters cannot be looked into by the Court of Settlement and unless there is such declaration by a court of law, she cannot raise this point in a summary proceeding.

29. The Court of Settlement cannot decide the said issue in a summary proceeding and it has given the power under section 10. If Zafar Tehrani has no exclusive ownership in the property, he cannot alienate the entire property in favour of his son Rafi Tehrani. If the donor has no exclusive title in the property, the donee cannot acquire title pursuant to gift. Even if it is assumed that Hosne Ara is the wife of Raft Tehrani, if Rafi Tehrani does not acquire exclusive title on the basis of the oral gift, he cannot make any oral gift in favour of his wife plain and simple. Therefore, the alleged oral gifts made by Zafar Tehrani and then by Rafi Tehrani are concocted stories introduced by Hosne Ara with a view to grab the property is apparent. The oral gifts have not been acted upon, inasmuch as, the donors had no exclusive right, title, interest and possession therein. Rafi Tehrani did not get possession on the basis of oral gift as his father had no exclusive title and Hosne Ara also did not get possession on the basis of oral gift which she has also admitted in her evidence.

30. Hosne Ara in her deposition admitted in chief that "নালিশী সম্পত্তিতে দখলে থাকার সময় শহীদুল হক, আইয়ুব, ইসমাইল হোসেন, রেহানা আঞ্জুম, শতকত খান-শিখা হকের নিকট বিক্রয় করেন। তারা কিছু দখলে আছে কিছু নাই।" If she had no possession, she could not give possession to the purchasers and therefore, the purchasers did not acquire title on the strength of the deeds. She stated that Atiqur Rahman and others took possession from her. If Atiqur Rahman and others illegally possessed the case land how can she transfer to Shahidul Hoque Bhuiyan and others? She failed to substantiate her claim that Atiqur Rahman took forcible possession. She did not explain as to what action she has taken against the trespassers. So, the purchasers cannot claim title. She denied the suggestion that after departure of Rafi Tehrani, the government leased out the disputed property in favour of Abdur Rashid but Abdus Sobhan in his statement admitted that Abdur Rashid was in possession immediately after the liberation of Bangladesh. In another suggestion relating to filing of Title Suit No. 425 of 1978, she expressed her ignorance whether Rafi Tehrani through his attorney Ruhul Amin was made defendant in the suit. This reply clearly indicated that Rafi Tehrani was not her husband and that he wanted to defend the suit and he prayed for addition party in the suit land. She further stated that in cross-examination that she filed Title Suit No. 367 of 1981 for getting possession of the property and then said she could not say for what relief she instituted the suit. This statement made it abundantly clear that she has no idea regarding the property and the litigation and that she has been set up by interested persons. This inference lends support from the statement of PW 3. The last admission belies her claim that she has got possession of the property on the basis of oral gift. In the premises, the High Court Division was perfectly justified in maintaining the judgment of the Court of Settlement.

31. As regards decrees, it has been strenuously argued that in view of the decrees passed in Title Suit Nos. 31 of 1972 and 425 of 1978, the High Court Division erred in law in not holding that the disputed property was illegally declared as abandoned property. The Court of Settlement on perusal of the plaints and other materials on record came to a definite finding that the decrees were obtained by practising fraud upon the court. The Court of Settlement is perfectly justified in holding as such. It is now settled that even without challenging a decree if it can be shown that any decree has been obtained by fraud a court in a collateral proceeding can ignore such decree. A judgment obtained by fraud or collusion may be treated as nullity. Even the executing court may refuse to execute a void decree without any formal proceedings to set aside the same if it can be shown that on the face of the decree it has been obtained by fraud. It is the party against whom it is offered as shield may prove that the court which gave it had no jurisdiction. If a judgment or decree is vitiated on the ground of fraud the defendant can also resist the decree.

32. Section 44 of the Evidence Act was included with the object of avoiding multiplicity of proceedings. It is in order to show that a judgment obtained by fraud from a court is wholly vitiated and has no binding force either on the court passing it or on the party against which it is passed. Other object is that the party against whom the judgment was obtained through fraud should not be compelled to institute another suit and not permitted to move the court from which the judgment was obtained through fraud by raising a defence in the proceedings initiated. A judgment obtained by perjury cannot attain finality and it can be challenged at any time by any interested party by filing an application or by way of defence on the ground that the decree was vitiated by fraud. Reference in these connections are Asmat Ara Begum vs Hajira Bibi, PLD 1964 Peshawar, 283; Rajib Panda vs Lakhan Sendh Mavapatra, 27 Cal 11; Bansi vs Dhap (1902) ILR 24 All 242; Parbati vs Gajraj, AIR 1937 All 28; Prayag vs Siva, AIR 1926 Cal 1; Hare Krishna vs Umesh, AIR 1921 Pat 193; Ranganath vs Gobinda (1904) ILR 28 Bom 639; Jamiruddin vs Khadejanessa, AIR 1929 Cal 685; Gurajada Vijaya vs Padmanabhani, AIR 1955 AP 112, section 1714 of Taylor 's Evidence; Reg vs Sadler's Company (1868) 11 ER 1088; Tribani Mistra vs Ram Pujan Mistra, AIR 1917 Patna 13. In Gram Panchayat of Village Naulakha vs Ujagar Singh, AIR 2000 SC 3272, the Supreme Court of India approved the views taken in those cases and observed "Thus in order to contend in a latter suit or proceeding that an earlier judgment was obtained by collusion, it is not necessary to file an independent suit as stated in Jagor Rami's case for a declaration as to its collusive nature or for setting it aside, as a condition precedent." What's more, the government was not party in those suits and therefore, those exparte decrees are not binding upon them. It can ignore them. Therefore, the Court of Settlement has rightly held that since the decrees were obtained by fraud, these decrees are not binding upon the government.

33. Apart from the above, the very natures of transactions apparently show that the decrees have been obtained by fraud. The oral gift in favour of Rafi Tehrani was allegedly made on 1st October, 1971. He filed the suit on 9th May, 1972. The suit was instituted for declaring that "the plaintiff is the sole legal heir of schedule a, b and c properties and he has legal right, title and interest in the same'. In October, he got the property by way of oral gift and he instituted the suit on 9th May, 1972 i.e. within 6 months from the date of oral gift. Under the Mohammedan Law an oral gift followed by delivery of possession is as good as a sale and if it can be proved that the oral gift has been acted upon, the transfer is conclusive. In this case Rafi Tehrani sought confirmation of the oral gift. Is it at all necessary? This filing of the suit seeking confirmation of his title by way of oral gift indicates beyond doubt that there was no gift at all and that he got a collusive decree by introducing a story of oral gift. In the cause title, he stated that the suit for declaration of title but in the prayer he sought for confirmation of oral gift. He got decree within 4 months from the date of institution of the suit.

34. In respect of the other suit, the oral gift was made on 3rd September, 1972 and Hosne Ara filed Title Suit No. 425 of 1978 for confirmation of the oral gift. This also apparently shows that though law does not require any declaration of confirming oral gift, she had adopted the similar procedure of what Rafi Tahrani had done to give a legal colour of his alleged gift. She also got an exparte decree within a short span of time. Thus there is no doubt that she got a collusive decree confirming the oral gift. This fact has been drawn to the attention of the learned counsel but the learned counsel simply replied that in order to avoid any complication in future she instituted the suit. It is totally unheard of that after the oral gift the donee has to obtain a decree to reconfirm the oral gift even if the gift has been acted upon. Normally if an oral gift is made the same is followed by a declaration by the donor by an affidavit as evidence of oral gift. In this case, only to give a colour by a decree she has resorted to forgery. Further the Court of Settlement rightly held that she had no semblance of interest in the property on the day of filing the case before the Court of Settlement, inasmuch as, she had already transferred the property to other applicants. The other applicants other than Shahidul Hoque Bhuiyan did not depose in support of their claim.

35. As regards the claim of Abdus Sobhan, as noticed by the Court of Settlement, he admitted that after the liberation A Rashid Chowdhury was in possession of house No.5 (an area of 0.75 acre that is almost the entire disputed property). House No.5 relates to CS Plot Nos.329, 322, 326, 327, 328 and 325. It covers almost the entire disputed property. There is no explanation how he got possession from A Rashid Chowdhury. So, apparently he was not in possession immediately after the liberation of the country. He claimed that Hosne Ara never possessed the disputed property and Shahidul and Ismail are in possession. He also admitted that neither Rashid nor Shahidul nor Ismail were in possession. According to his admission another person was in possession and therefore, he cannot maintain a petition under section 7, inasmuch as, his title has not been established by any court of law. More so, from the statements made in paragraphs VII-XV under section 7 of the Ordinance, Abdus Sohan does not retain any land in the disputed plot even if he has allegedly inherited and thus, he also does not maintain any petition. When this fact has been drawn to the notice, the learned counsel could not give any satisfactory reply.

36. If neither Hosne Ara nor Abdus Sobhan nor the transferees of Hosne Ara nor Abdus Sobhan are in possession, the question of service of notice upon anyone of them does not arise at all. Therefore, the High Court Division is perfectly justified in affirming the judgment of Court of Settlement holding that since they are not in possession, no notice is required to be served upon them.

37. Admittedly Hosne Ara has allegedly alienated her alleged right, title and interest in favour of Shahidul Haque Bhuiyan, Md.. Tajul Islam Chowdhury, Md.. Ismail Hossain, Md.. Shawkat Ali Khan, Md.. Ayub, Mrs. Shikha Haque, and Mst Rehana Anjoo. Except Shahidul Haque, though other purchasers have filed separate cases, they have not deposed before the Court of Settlement. Shahidul Haque Bhuiyan claimed that he purchased the property from Hosne Ara. He did not claim that he got possession of the property. Hosne Ara admitted that the purchasers could not get possession of the entire property after purchase. Other applicants did not depose in the case, so they are not in possession. P.W.3 stated that one Ruhul Amin told that Rafi gifted the property to Hosne Ara. He, however, could not say after liberation who possessed the property and in which manner. Admittedly P.W.1 did not get possession of the entire land on the basis of oral gift. The question is how much portion they are in possession? If they are not in possession how they claim exclusion of the property from the list of abandoned property. Therefore, apparently from this admission it is clear that the oral gifts have not been acted upon and by dint of the oral gifts the alleged purchasers have acquired no semblance of right, title and interest in the disputed property.

38. Hosne Ara stated that when she was in possession she sold the land to Shahidul Huq, Aiyub, Ismail Hossain, Rehana Anjoo, Shawkat Khan and Shikha Huq. Shahidul Huq Bhuiya stated that at the time of purchase the documents were lying with Ruhul Amin, friend of Rafi Tehrani. This claim is absurd in that Hosne Ara claimed that she was the owner, but according to Shahidul Huq the deeds were then lying with a third person. He then said রুহুল আমিন রফির সম্পত্তি হোসেন আরাকে দান করেছে বলেছেন।’ So this witness said Ruhul Amin gifted Rafi's property to Hosne Ara. He made out a third case. According to him Rafi gifted through attorney Ruhul Amin to Hosne Ara. This is not the claim of Hosne Ara. Again Shahidul Huq stated that the documents were lying with Ruhul Amin and due to his sudden death he could not collect all documents. There are apparent inconsistencies on every count of transactions. The story introduced by Shahidul Huq revealed one fact which could not be denied. It is that the story of oral gifts, the marriage, the decrees are all collusive transactions created by a powerful person behind the scene with a view to grab the property. This Hosne Ara has been set up by the said person and she is also a fake person. On the question of marriage and issue of a child in the marriage the Court of Settlement disbelieved the marriage, on assigning cogent reasons. Hosne Ara did not explain why Rail Tehrani left for London leaving daughter. Hasina Tehrani said her father sent letter through comrade Forhad. She could not say the address of her father which is totally an unbelievable story. She was appearing in the B.A. examination and a literate woman, but she does not know her father's address in London although she had contact with her father. This is totally an absurd story to believe in.

39. It is contended that since Raft Tehrani's other properties of Purana Paltan having been released as not abandoned property, the declaration of the disputed property as abandoned property was illegal. In this connection the learned counsel has drawn our attention the Ministry of Works and Urban Development's order in respect of a property situated at 21/1 Purana Paltan. The Sub-Divisional Officer released the said property. As observed above, Rafi Tehrani was not the exclusive owner of the property and on the basis of oral gift by Zafar Tehrani, Rafi Tehrani and Hosne Ara could not claim ownership in the property, inasmuch as, Zafar Tehrani had no exclusive title in the property and that the decree in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 was also procured collusively by interested party. This Purana Paltan Property has also been released by the interested quarter and this release will no defers the government to take over this property if it is found that by operation of law this property has been vested in the government. While considering a statutory provision there can be no estoppel against statute. The doctrine of `approbate and reprobate' is only a species of estoppel; it applies only to the conduct of the parties. As in the case of estoppel it cannot operate against the provisions of a statute.

40. More so, the appellants could not prove that Hosne Ara was the legally married wife of Rafi Tehrani. The decrees and papers were created by the interested party with a view to grab the property. More so, Hosne Ara was not in the scene at that time. The powerful persons got the Purana Paltan property released by deceitful means from the office of the then Sub-Divisional Officer. This will not improve the case unless the appellants can prove that Zafor Tehrani, his wife and daughters were in this country on 28th February, 1972; that the said owners legally transferred the property in favour of Rafi Tehrani and that Hosne Ara is the legally married wife of Rafi Tehrani. The first group of appellants have failed to substantiate these facts which are relevant for determining as to whether the property was legally declared as abandoned property. Mere release of a partial property by a deceitful means does not detract the authority to declare the disputed property as abandoned.

41. More so, it is found that admittedly Abdur Rashid Chowdhury was in possession of the present property in respect of a portion after the independence and the remaining portion was in possession of Bangladesh Tea Board. Till then neither Rafi Tehrani nor Hosne Ara or Abdus Sobhan were in the scene. There is no explanation from either side how Abdur Rashid and Tea Board went into possession. Why Rafi Tehrani and Abdus Sobhan were not in possession on 28th February 1972 if they had title and possession as claimed? If Rafi Tehrani really claimed owner-ship, got the property by way of oral gift from his father, he could have prayed for handing over the property in his favour since he was not in possession of the said property in 1972. It is, therefore, presumed that the interested parties having managed to get released of the property of Purana Paltan noticed that this disputed property also belonged to Zafar Tehrani and others created the papers and set up new story for the purpose of grabbing the property. This will be evident from the fact that on 23rd December, 1972, the then Sub-Divisional Officer cancelled the allotment of 22/1 Purana Paltan property and though the alleged oral gift was made prior to that date, no prayer for release of this property was made at that time.

42. Rafi Tehrani was also not in the country and on his behalf those interested group set up a fake person and produced in the third court of Subordinate Judge, Dhaka in title suit No. 31 of 1972 showing him a resident of Gulshan which will be evident from the fact that he was identified by Enayet Hossain Khan, Advocate, though the plaintiff is not required to be identified by a lawyer. If Rafi Tehrani resided at Moghbazar, it is not clear why he resided at Gulshan. Secondly, if Rafi Tehrani was in this country in 1972, in title suit no 143 of 1972 instituted by Abdus Sobhan, Rafi Tehrani would not have tried to implead as defendant through his attorney.

43. This identification speaks volume that a disputed person was produced before the commissioner to depose on behalf of Rafi Tehrani and got the decree in the suit. In the plaint he stated that his mother died on 25th September, 1971, and on her death Rafi Tehrani's two sisters also inherited the property. Zafar Tehrani in such circumstances cannot make oral gift in favour of Rafi Tehrani. This release Purana Paltan property will not stand in the way in declaring the disputed property as abandoned property. Learned Counsel appearing for the appellants could not meet the findings of the High Court Division that it cannot sit as an appellate court over the judgment of the Court of Settlement for reassessment of the evidence in the absence of any error apparent on the face of the record. The High Court Division has pin pointed the findings arrived at by the Court of Settlement and those findings are based on consideration of materials on record.

<u>44. A writ of certiorari is maintainable only if it can be shown that the tribunal erroneously held that the property was illegally declared as abandoned property without admitting legal evidence or rejected the legal evidence or it has misconstrued the law. In other words, a writ of certiorari does not lie for an erroneous decision in respect of a matter which is within the jurisdiction of the inferior tribunal. Unless such erroneous decision relates to anything collateral, an erroneous decision upon which might affect jurisdiction and the statute does not confer upon the tribunal final jurisdiction to decide such question. A writ of certiorari is maintainable only in a case where erroneous decision within its jurisdiction. Even if there is mere error of law that will not confer any power on the High Court Division to issue a writ of certiorari except where there is an error apparent on the face of the record, that means, the error must be something more than a mere error. The High Court Division can issue writ of certiorari only if it can be shown that the judgment has been obtained by fraud, collusion or corruption or where the tribunal has acted contrary to the principles of natural justice or where there is an error apparent on the face of the record or where the tribunal's conclusion is based on no evidence whatsoever or where the decision is vitiated by malafide.</u>

<u>45. The crux of the matter is whether the disputed property is abandoned property within the meaning of Abandoned Property (Control, Management and Disposal) Order, 1972 and that the whereabouts of the owners were not in this country on 28th February, 1972. On both counts the Court of Settlement found in affirmative. The first groups of appellants are claiming the property by way of alienation after 28th February, 1972. In Government V. Orex Network Ltd., 10 ADC 1, the claimant claimed the property on the basis of oral gift followed by an affidavit acknowledging the gift on taking prior permission from the Ministry of Works for transfer, and the Ministry on accepting transfer fees mutated the name of the claimant. Three of us (CJ, Md.. Abdul Wahhab Mia and Syed Mahmud Hossain, JJ.) were members of the Bench in which it was held that 'Admittedly the disputed property was published in the `1(ha' list of the abandoned buildings by Gazette Notification dated 23-9-1986. Therefore, all the permissions accorded by the Ministry of Works and from 23-9-1986 allowing mutation and transfer were void and those orders were obtained by collusion and fraud'. So, in this case also all the deeds and transfers were collusively made after PO 16 of 1972 came into force and these transfers are hit by article 6 of PO 16 of 1972. Similarly, Abdus Sobhan failed to substantiate his clean title and possession. He being a citizen of this country ought to have given explanation why he was not in possession in 1972 has he been really inherited the same.</u>

<u>46. Reliance was placed in respect of the case of Bangladesh vs MS Ispahani, 40 DLR (AD) 116 and some other cases. In MS Ispahani, the latter is the son of Justice MA Ispahani who died in 1982 at Dhaka. After liberation he surrendered his Pakistani passport and applied for British passport on 28th February, 1972. This Division taking into consideration of the Bangladesh citizenship (Temporary provision) Order, 1972, article 2 of PO 16 of 1972 held the MS Ispahani does not come within the definitive clause of article 2(1) and therefore, the property in question is not abandoned property. Similar views have been expressed in Abdur Rahman vs Speed Bird Navigation Co., 30 DLR (SC) 101. In course of hearing and after conclusion of hearing, the appellants of the first group have filed some documents relating to the property. These papers not having filed either in the Court of Settlement or in the High Court Division, there is no scope for examination of those documents as a final court of fact at this belated stage.</u>

47. The appellants failed to point out anything to bring the matter within the ambit of writ of certiorari. In the premises, the High Court Division is perfectly justified in not interfering with the judgment of the Court of Settlement. These appeals are, therefore, dismissed without any order as to costs.

48. Md.. Abdul Wahhab Miah J: I have had the privilege of going through the judgment prepared by my Lordship, the Chief Justice, but 1 am sorry I could not agree with the findings, the reasoning and the ultimate conclusion in dismissing the appeals and therefore, I am giving my own findings, reasoning and the decision.

49. Civil Appeal No. 10 of 2003, (CA) is, by leave, from the judgment and order dated 4-6-2003 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Writ Petition No.718 of 1995 heard analogously with Writ Petition Nos.968, 975 of 1995 and 1398 of 1995 discharging the Rule Nisi.

50. Facts giving rise to this appeal are that the appellants, herein, 8 (eight) in number, filed Case No. 649 of 1988 (Kha-1), House No. 5, Moghbazar (Outer Circular Road), New Number 70-71, Outer Circular Road, Moghbazar, Dhaka (herein-after referred to as the property in question) challenging the legality of enlisting the same in the `Kha' list of the abandoned buildings as abandoned property in the light of the provisions of the Abandoned Buildings (Supplementary Provisions) Ordinance, 1985 (Ordinance No. LIV of 1985), shortly, the Ordinance and publishing the list so made in the Bangladesh Gazette dated April 28, 1986 stating, inter alia, that one Khan Mohammad Nuruddahar of village-Ratoil, PS-Kashiani, District-Gopalganj, purchased 18 decimals land of CS Plot No.327 and 22 decimals land of CS Plot No.328 appertaining to Khatian No.56 of Mouza-Bara Maghbazar, Police Station-Ramna, Dhaka. Said Khan Mohammad Nuruddahar sold the land as purchased by him to Zafar Tehrani on 23-6-1953. Zafar Tehrani again purchased the land of CS Plot No. 329 from Matilal Dey MajuMd.er in the name of his wife Amena Sultana as his benaMd.er on October 14, 1947. Zafar Tehrani also purchased the land of CS Plot Nos. 325, 326 and 332 in the name of his wife, Amena Sultana and daughters-Nargis Khanum and Rokeya Sultana as their benaMd.er from Fazle Ahmed Karim, Khan Bahadur Md. Solaiman, Sagiruddin Ahmed Surwardy and Fatema Fazal on 23-2-1960 and 9-3-1960. The land purchased by Zafar Tehrani was recorded in the SA Khatian in his name and in the names of his wife and daughters and while he was in possession and enjoyment of the said land, he gifted all the aforesaid purchased land to his son, Rafi Tehrani on 1-10-1971. Rafi Tehrani filed Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 to confirm the oral gift and obtained decree on 21-9-1972. Rafi Tehrani made an oral gift to his wife, Hosne Ara Begum on 3-9-1972. Hosne Ara Begum got possession of the property as gifted to her by Rafi Tehrani and got her name mutated in the revenue records. She filed Title Suit No.425 of 1978 to confirm the oral gift of her husband and obtained decree on 6-5-1980. She then transferred some land to appellant Nos.1-6 and 8 and the purchasers created municipal holding in respect of their respective portion of their purchased land. While Hosne Ara Begum and her transferees were in possession and enjoyment of the land, they noticed that their properties had been included in the `Kha' list prepared under the provision of the Ordinance and the said list was published in the Bangladesh Gazette. Thereupon, the appellants filed the case before the First Court of Settlement, Dhaka seeking exclusion of the property in question, from the list of abandoned buildings as published in the Bangladesh Gazette.

51. The Court of Settlement hearing the instant case along with the other cases filed by the appellant and others dismissed the case by its decision dated 28-12-1994; hence the appellants filed Writ Petition No.718 of 1995 before the High Court Division and obtained the Rule Nisi.

52. The Government contested the Rule Nisi issued in the writ petition verbally through its Assistant Attorney General (no affidavit-in-opposition was filed) contending, inter alia, that the property in question claimed by Hosne Ara Begum and her transferees was left uncared by Rafi Tehrani during the liberation war and after emergence of Bangladesh, his whereabouts were not known and thereupon the property in question had assumed the character of abandoned property, the Government legally treated the same as abandoned property and enlisted the same as an abandoned building and thereupon published the list in the Gazette.

53. The High Court Division by its judgment and order dated 4-6-2001 discharged the Rule Nisi.

54. Against the judgment and order of the High Court Division, the appellants filed Civil Petition for Leave Appeal No. 2001 of 2001 before this Division and leave was granted to consider the submissions made by their learned Counsel as follows:

"Learned Counsel for the petitioners submits that the Court of Settlement as well as the High Court Division committed illegality in not holding that since admittedly no notice under section 5(1) (b) of the Abandoned Buildings (Supplementary Provisions) Ordinance, 1985 was issued against the petitioners and/or any other person in possession of the property, the inclusion of the same in the Kha list was illegal, malafide and without jurisdiction. The learned Counsel further submits that the Court of Settlement as well as the High Court Division has mis-interpreted the provisions of oral Heba under Muslim Law and the Court of Settlement wrongly held that "when gift by way of written document goes away and is disbelieved, then the fact of oral gift is disbelieved accordingly" and the finding is contrary to all established principles of law as to Muslim gift and thereby High Court Division and the Court of Settlement had committed illegality. The learned Counsel also submits that Government cannot treat the property of the same person in different manners, one property (Purana Paltan) released from the list of abandoned property on the ground that Rafi Tehrani was Bangladesh National at the relevant time and holding Bangladesh passport and as such his property cannot be declared to be the abandoned property, whereas the same Government listed his Moghbazar property in the Kha list of abandoned buildings on the ground that it is an abandoned property and thereby committed illegality and has taken self contradictory stands, which the High Court Division and Court of Settlement failed to take into consideration. The learned Counsel lastly submits that even if for the sake of argument it is accepted that the petitioner No.7 is not the lawful owner of the disputed property, then it remains the property of her husband Rafi Tehrani and he being a Bangladesh and /or UK national, his property cannot be declared to be an abandoned property and as such the inclusion of the disputed property in the Kha list of abandoned buildings was illegal, without jurisdiction and malafide."

55. CA No.77 of 2003 is, by leave, from the same judgment and order of the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 968 of 1995 heard analogously with Writ Petition No. 718 of 1995 (giving rise to Civil Appeal No. 10 of 2003), Writ Petition Nos. 975 and 1398 of 1995 discharging the Rules Nisi issued in all the writ petitions.

56. The appellant as the writ-petitioner filed Writ Petition No. 968 of 1995 before the High Court Division challenging the decision of the First Court of Settlement in Case No.586 of 1988(Kha) filed under section 7 of the Ordinance rejecting the case.

57. The case of the appellant was that one Mairan Bepari was the CS recorded tenant of the land in CS Plot Nos.325, 327, 328, 329 and 332 appertaining to CS Khatian Nos.189, 34, 131, 240, 128 and 127 of Mouza-Bara Maghbazar. Mairan Bepari became the owner of the properties of the aforesaid plots by inheritance as well as by purchase from the CS recorded tenants, Sagiruddin Sheikh and others. After the death of Mairan Bepari, the properties devolved upon his son, Abdur Rahman and others and after the death of Abdur Rahman, the property of the aforesaid CS plots devolved upon Abdus Sobhan (the appellant) and others and that by amicable arrangement with other co-sharers, Abdus Sobhan got the property of the CS plots as mentioned hereinbefore. Abdus Sobhan owned and possessed the property for more than 12(twelve) years before the promulgation of President's Order No.16 of 1972 (PO 16 of 1972). After the promulgation of PO 16 of 1972, the Sub-Divisional Officer, Dhaka on 21-7-1972 wanted to take over possession of the land and structures of holding Nos. 70 and 71, Outer Circular Road, Magbazar (hereinafter referred to as the property in question) by force and then the appellant along with another filed Title Suit No.183 of 1972 in the Court of the then Munsif, First Court (now the Assistant Judge) for permanent injunction against the Government of Bangladesh, represented by the Deputy Commissioner, Dhaka, the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar(South) Dhaka; the Secretary, Ministry of Works; the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, restraining them permanently from entering into the property in question, changing its character and from any way disturbing their peaceful possession therein. Subsequently, the suit being transferred to the Court of Munsif, Third Court, Dhaka was renumbered as Title Suit No.926 of 1981. In the suit, on an application for temporary injunction to the above effect, an order of temporary injunction was passed in favour of the appellant on 8-5-1973. During the pendency of the suit, the appellant transferred .4148 acre land of CS Plot Nos. 326, 329 and 332 of Municipal holding No. 70 to Zakia Sultana and Lutful Sultana in June and July, 1973. Later on, in July, 1974, Zakia Sultana and Lutful Huda sold their shares to Anowarul Islam Beg and others. The appellant sold 3 kathas land from CS Plot Nos.328 and 329 on 28-1-1974 to Ayub Ali who transferred the same to Muttaqui Chowdhury and Murshida Akhter on 17-2-1975. The appellant thereafter made several sales to different persons from different plots mentioned hereinbefore. After the sale, how much remained, the appellant possessed the same and during the R.S. operation, Khatian Nos. 2562 and 2571 of Mouza-Bara Maghbazar were duly prepared in his name. The transferees from the appellant made permanent and semi permanent constructions as well as erected tin-shed and the said transferees got their names mutated in the revenue record and that they paid rents and that separate municipal holding numbers had been opened in their names. The appellant dealt with the property in question as of his and that he made transfers and there was no reason or occasion for treating the same as abandoned property. The property in question was never treated as abandoned property and that possession thereof was not taken over by the Government at any time nor any order or notice for surrendering the possession thereof was made or issued to him at any time and that no notice was served upon him or any person as per provision of section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance. That in a portion of the property in question (holding No.71), Parkul Tea Estate, was the tenant under the appellant and the same was taken over by Bangladesh Tea Board after promulgation of PO 16 of 1972 and thereupon the appellant came to know as to the enlisting of the property in question in the `Kha' list treating the same as abandoned property and then filed the aforementioned case before the First Court of Settlement, under section 7 of the Ordinance seeking exclusion of the same from the list of the abandoned buildings as enlisted in the gazette notification published as per provision of the Ordinance. The Court of Settlement rejected the case by its decision dated 28-12-1994. Thereupon, the appellant moved the High Court Division and obtained the Rule Nisi in the aforementioned writ petition.

58. The Rule Nisi obtained by the appellant was opposed by the Government of Bangladesh, represented by the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Public Works (writ-respondent No.2) by filing affidavit-in-opposition contending, inter alia, that the petitioner never possessed the property in question immediately before commencement of PO 16 of 1972. The Court of Settlement also found that the petitioner never possessed the property in question just before the commencement of PO 16 of 1972 and one Abdur Rashid, Advocate, went into the possession thereof immediately after liberation of Bangladesh. Hence the property in question has rightly been vested in the Government under PO 16 of 1972.

59. The High Court Division hearing the writ petition along with the other writ petitions filed against the same decision of the Court of Settlement by the impugned judgment and order discharged the Rule Nisi.

60. Against the judgment and order of the High Court Division, the appellant filed Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 1937 of 2001 before this Division and leave was granted to consider the submission of his learned Advocate as under: "The learned Advocate for the petitioner submits that the finding of the Court of Settlement that Section 4(1)(b) of the Ordinance is applicable in the instant case and that inclusion of the property in question in the list published under Section 5(I) of the Ordinance No.54 of 1985 is the conclusive evidence as to the fact of abandoned character of the property is wrong as because the petitioner became lawful owner in possession of the same Notice under section 5(1) (b) of the Ordinance No.54 of 1985 was required to be served but no such notice was served and as such provisions of section 4(1)(b) and Section 5(2) of the said Ordinance are not applicable in the case but the Court of Settlement without considering that aspects of the case dismissed the settlement case and as such acted illegally and without lawful authority."

61. Of the two appeals, I shall deal with CA No.10 of 2003 first. At the risk of repetition, it is stated that the appellants sought exclusion of the property in question from the list of abandoned buildings on the fact that the same belonged to Khan Mohammad Nuruddahar of village-Ratoil, Police Station Kashiani, District-formerly Faridpur now Gopalganj being CS Plot Nos. 327 and 328 comprising an area of 0.18 acre land and 0.22 acre land respectively. The same was purchased by Zafar Tehrani by registered sale deed being Nos. 5173 and 5241 dated 23-6-1953. The land of CS Plot No.329 belonged to Motilal Dey MajuMd.er who sold the same in favour of Mrs. Amena Sultana, a benaMd.er of Zafar Tehrani on 14-10-1947 by a registered deed being No.5331 and the land of CS Plot Nos. 325, 326 and 332 belonged to Fazle Ahmed Karim, Khan Bahadur Md. Solaiman, Sagiruddin Ahmed Sarwardy and Fatema Fazle who sold the same in favour of Amena Sultana, wife of Zafar Tehrani and Nargis Khanam and Rokeya Sultana, the daughters of Zafar Tehrani by registered deed Nos. 3485 dated 23-2-1960, 3484 dated 23-2-1960 and 4208 dated 9-3-1960 respectively. The SA Khatian in respect of those plots of land was duly prepared in the names of the aforesaid purchasers. As a matter of fact, those properties were purchased by Zafar Tehrani in his own name and in the names of his wife and daughters. Zafar Tehrani made an oral gift of all the landed properties in favour of his only son-Rafi Tehrani. Rafi Tehrani having got possession possessed the same with exclusive title and got a decree in his favour in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 on 2-9-1972 from the 3rd Court of Subordinate Judge, Dhaka and thus his oral gift was confirmed. Rafi Tehrani married Hosne Ara Begum on 30-3-1970, he made an oral gift of the property in question to his wife-Hosne Ara Begum (appellant No.7) on 3-9-1972 who accepted the gift and took over physical possession of the property in question in presence of witnesses and the said oral gift was put in writing also. On 18-10-1972, Hosne Ara Begum filed Title Suit No. 425 of 1978 in the First Court of Subordinate Judge, Dhaka to confirm the oral gift made by her husband in her favour and obtained a decree on May 6, 1980. After that Hosne Ara Begum got her name mutated in the revenue record and that she transferred some land to appellant Nos. 1-6 and 8 and the purchasers got municipal holding number in respect of their respective portion of land.

62. In the writ petition, it was categorically stated that notice was issued from the Officer-in-charge of Abandoned Properties, namely, the Sub-Divisional Officer, (Sadar) South, Dhaka for declaring holding No. 21/1, Purana Paltan, Dhaka which belonged to Rafi Tehrani as abandoned property and a case being No.1044 AP(Ramna) of 1972 for the purpose was started. In the case, Rafi Tehrani personally appeared before the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar (South), Dhaka; he produced his international passport No.A030855 issued by the Deputy Director, Immigration and Passport, the Government of Bangladesh. The Sub-Divisional Officer, i.e. the Officer-in-charge, examining the whole case and on scrutiny of the passport of Rafi Tehrani, found him as a Bangladeshi national, found that his father, Zafar Tehrani, gifted his property to his son-Rafi Tehrani. The Sub-Divisional Officer also considered the decree passed in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 Of the Third Court of Subordinate Judge. Dhaka in favour of Rafi Tehrani and directed to drop the property from the list of abandoned properties and directed his officer to inform the Ministry accordingly. The Sub-Divisional Officer by his Memo No. 2915/1(1) AP/2 dated 23-12-1972 requested the Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Public Works, the Government of Bangladesh, to release the property in favour of Rafi Tehrani; a copy of the letter was forwarded to Rafi Tehrani along with the certified copy of the order of the Sub-Divisional Officer. By virtue of the gift by Rafi Tehrani, all of his properties devolved upon writ-petitioner No.7 (appellant No.7 herein). But unfortunately, the property was not delivered to her and it was being occupied by Bangladesh Communist Party without any proper authority. It was further stated that so far as 'C'-scheduled property of Title Suit No.31 of 1972 was concerned, it was still in possession of appellant No.7.

63. In the instant case, it appears from the leave granting order that leave was granted to consider 4(four) submissions made on behalf of the appellants: (i) whether the Court of Settlement and the High Court Division were correct in taking the view as to the legal consequence of non service of notice under section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance upon the appellants "and/or any other person in possession of the property" in enlisting the same as an abandoned building in the `Kha' list, (ii) whether the Court of Settlement and the High Court Division misinterpreted the provisions of oral gift under Mohammedan Law and whether the Court of Settlement was correct in holding that "when gift by way of written document goes away and is disbelieved, then the fact of oral gift is disbelieved accordingly" and whether that finding is contrary to all established principles of law as to Muslim gift, (iii) whether the Government could treat the property of the same person, namely, Rafi Tehrani "in different manner", i.e. one property (Purana Paltan) released from the list of abandoned property on the ground that he was a Bangladeshi national at the relevant time and holding Bangladesh Passport and as such, his property could not be declared to be the abandoned property, whereas the same Government enlisted his Mogbazar property in the `Kha' list of abandoned building on the ground that it was an abandoned property and thereby taking self-contradictory stand which the High Court Division and the Court of Settlement failed to take into consideration and (iv) whether, even for argument's sake it is found that appellant No.7 (Hosne Ara Begum) is not the lawful owner of the property in question then it remains the property of her husband, Rafi Tehrani and he being a Bangladeshi national or UK national, his property could not be declared to be an abandoned property and as such, the inclusion of the property in question in the `Kha' list of abandoned buildings was illegal, without jurisdiction and malafide.

64. So far as the first submission on which leave was granted giving rise to this appeal (CA No. 10 of 2003) is concerned, this is common to the submission on which leave was granted in the civil petition for leave to appeal giving rise to CA No.77 of 2003, so I shall discuss and decide the same at the last.

65. Let me discuss the 3 (three) other submissions as jotted down hereinbefore on which leave was granted in this appeal.

66. Since in the judgment of the majority, the arguments advanced by the respective learned Counsel of the appeals have been noted, I do not consider it necessary to repeat their respective arguments, however, reference shall be made to their arguments at appropriate place.

67. Although before the Court of Settlement, the Government did not file any written statement stating its case, from the decision of the Court of Settlement, it is clear that it admitted the owner-ship of Rafi Tehrani of the property in question as the Court of Settlement in its decision noted "The OP Government contested the case but did not file written statement. The case of the OP Government that appears from the trend of the cross examination is that the case building vested in the Government as abandoned property after Rafi Tehrani left abandoning the case house and that the Government leased out the same in favour of one Abdur Rashid."

68. As stated hereinbefore, before the High Court Division, the Government did not file any affidavit-in-opposition in Writ Petition No.718 of 1995 controverting the statements made therein. From the impugned judgment, it appears that the learned Judges noted the submission of Mr. Probir Neogi, learned Assistant Attorney General in respect of this writ petition (Writ Petition No.718 of 1995) as follows:

"Mr. Probir Neogi, the learned Assistant Attorney General appearing with Reba Kanij has on the other had submitted that the writ-petitioner in Writ Petition No.718 of 1995 could not prove before the Court of Settlement that on 28-2-72, the date on which President's Order No. 16 of 1972 came into force or the date prior to that Rafi Tehrani, who allegedly claimed the property from his father by way of oral gift, was present in Bangladesh and was supervising or managing the property by himself. He then submitted that the decrees obtained in title suits having been a declaration on oral gift same are not attracted by proviso (a) of section 5(1) of Ordinance LI V of 1985. He then submitted that as the property was found to be an abandoned property and management and control were not with the original owner prior service of notice upon the petitioner is not the requirement of law."

69. From the impugned judgment and order, it further appears that respondent No.2, the Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, represented by the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Public Works, filed affidavit-in-opposition in Writ Petition Nos.968 of 1995, 975 of 1995 and 1398 of 1995. In Writ Petition No.975 of 1995, respondent No.2 categorically stated that as the original owner, Rafi Tehrani, had left the country before P.0.16 of 1972 came into being, the same automatically vested in the Government by operation of law. Neither the Government nor the other rival claimants in the property in question, namely, Abdus Sobhan, the appellant in CA No. 77 of 2003, did challenge that Rafi Tehrani was not the son of Zafar Tehrani. It is apparent from the decision of the Court of Settlement that the appellants in Civil Appeal No.10 of 2003 in support of their case that Zafar Tehrani (father of Rafi Tehrani) purchased 0.18 acre land and 0.22 acre land respectively of CS Plot Nos.327 and 328 from Khan Mohammad Nuruddahar of village-Ratoil, PS Kakhiani, formerly Faridpur, now Gopalganj by registered deeds being Nos. 5173 and 5241 dated 23-6-1953; that Zafar Tehrani purchased the land of CS Plot No. 329 from Motilal Dey MajuMd.er in the benami of his wife, Amena Sultana, by registered deed No. 5331 dated 14-10-1947 ad the land of CS Plot Nos. 325, 326 and 322 from Fazle Ahmed Karim, Khan Bandur Md. Solaiman, Sagiruddin Ahmed Sorwardi and Fatema Fazle in the benami of Amena Sultana, Nargis Khanam and Rokeya Sultana, his wife and daughters respectively by registered kabalas being deed Nos. 3485 dated 23-2-1960 and 3484 dated 23-2-1960 and 4208 dated 9-3-1960 respectively filed the documents before it. The Court of Settlement kept those documents outside their consideration on the ground that those "were not put and proved into evidence and marked exts", though it considered the other documents filed by the appellants, which were also not formally proved into evidence. Thus the Court of Settlement followed two different standards to consider the documents filed before it by the appellants. It is very significant to note that all these transferred deeds were executed and registered at a time when nobody thought of a law in the form of PO 16 of 1972 or the Ordinance and under section 114(e) of the Evidence Act, these deeds have a presumption of correctness. Moreso, none challenged those deeds. It is also very pertinent to state that it was the specific case of the appellants that SA Khatians in respect of those plots were prepared in the name of Zafar Tehrani and the other purchasers and those were filed before the Court of Settlement as have been clearly mentioned in its decision.

70. In spite of the fact that the Government admitted the ownership of Rafi Tehrani in the property in question, we consider it necessary to discuss the case of the appellants as to the acquisition of his (Rafi Tehrani) title therein. The specific case of the appellants was that Zafar Tehrani purchased land from the CS plots (plot numbers have been mentioned earlier) from its owners by registered kabalas in his own name and in the benami of his wife and daughters and he made an oral gift of all the lands and the properties in favour of his only son, Rafi Tehrani who having got possession of the land so transferred possessed the same with exclusive title and got a decree from the Court of Subordinate Judge, 3rd Court, Dhaka in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972. From the plaint of Title Suit No. 31 of 1972, it appears that the same was filed by Rafi Tehrani clearly stating as the son of Mohammad Zafar Tehrani. In the suit, Mohammad Zafar Tehrani, his daughters, Mrs. Rokeya Sultana and Mrs. Nargis Khanam were impleaded as defendant Nos. 1-3 (Mrs. Amena Sultana, the mother was not made a party in the suit as she died in the meantime). In the schedule to the plaint as many as three separate properties were mentioned in three separate schedule being schedule-`A', 'B' and 'C'. We consider it profitable to quote the schedules which are as under:

"Schedule 'A'

All that pieces and parcels of land with occupancy right including the appurtenances, appeandeques rights, liberties, privileges easement rights adverse title and possession within mouza 280, Bara Magh Bazar. PS Tejgaon, Dacca, appertaining to:—

Dhaka Collectorate 	   C. S. 		C. S. 	Area

Touzi Nos. 		Khatain 	Plot

287, 11326/11328/ 	   129 		327 	 0.18

11332/1333/11335/11   240                328       0.22

336/11337/1133/1133    54                 329       0.13

9/6019                           127                332       6kts 6Ch

"			    "		  "	      5"

0"

"		          127 & 189         332 & 	      4"

325           8"

"			     "		    "              4"

0"

Totaling 86 Decimals of land about

with two separate double storied buildings one completely new and the other renovated with complete separate boundary walls, separate gates garrages servant quarters, paths and passages vacant land, garden fittings and fixtures and all sundry whatever be attached to and found therein known as premises 5, Maghbazar Outer Circular Road, PS Ramna, Dhaka.

Schedule B

All that one-storied buildings, tements, here diterment and premises together with the piece and parcel of lease hold land bearing Municipal holding No.21/1, Purana Paltan, PS Ramna, Coprised in Dhaka Collectorate Touzi No.15579, Dag No.22 in Mahalla Purana Paltan, Word No.3, are 28926 acres or 17kathas (more or less).

Schedule `C'

District Dhaka, Police Station and Sub-Registrar Office Kaliakoir, Chasichala land appertaining to Dhaka Collectorate Touzi No.4827, Mouza Kawehakari 414, Khatian No.4/23 eastern portion of plot No.1948, are 1.65 decimals and of Touzi No. 27/5397/ 4827, Khatian No. 377/12 and 4/13, Plot No.1940, area 0.9 decimal being in total 1.74 decimal with one semi-pucca tin roofed house and bounded with pucca pillers and barbed wires."

71. From the plaint of Title Suit No.31 of 1972, it appears that specific assertion was made therein that the plaintiff (Rafi Tehrani) was the only son of defendant No. 1, Zafar Tehrani and his wife, Mrs. Amena Sultana, they migrated to Dhaka from Burma in the year 1942 and permanently settled here and that after independence of Bangladesh, the plaintiff expressed his allegiance to the People's Republic of Bangladesh and had been carrying on usual profession. In the plaint, it was further averred that defendant No.1 and his wife, Mrs. Amena Sultana were the full owners of 'A' scheduled property acquired partly by purchase in their own name and partly in the benami of others, namely, defendant Nos. 2 and 3 (defendant Nos. 2 and 3 were Mrs. Rokyea Sultana and Mrs. Nargis Khanam, daughters of Zafar Tehrani); that Mrs. Amena Sultana, mother of the plaintiff died on 25th of September, 1971 leaving behind the plaintiff and defendant No.1 as the only legal heirs as per Mohammadan law; that the defendant No.1 out of natural love and affection for his son, the plaintiff, gifted away his portion of interest in the 'A' scheduled property and also the portion which he had inherited after the death of his wife to the plaintiff in presence of Mr. Majid Talukdar and Mr. Ruhul Amin of Dacca on 1-10-1971 (`A' scheduled property is the property in question). The plaintiff duly accepted the gift made by his father and the delivery of possession of the 'A' scheduled property was also handed over to him on the same day. The title deeds and other relevant document were also handed over to the plaintiff by defendant No.1 at the time of the oral gift in presence of the said witnesses. Defendant No.1 was also the full owner of 'B' and `C' scheduled properties and on the aforesaid date, he also gifted away orally these two properties in favour of the plaintiff in presence of the aforesaid witnesses. The delivery of possession was also given to the plaintiff and the relevant documents and papers were handed over at the same time. Before the aforesaid gift, the defendant also executed general power of attorney in favour of the plaintiff. By virtue of the said gift as well as inheritance from his mother, the plaintiff had become the sole owner of 'A', 'B' and 'C' scheduled properties since 1-10-1971 and had been enjoying the same free from any disturbance and or encumbrances and exercising all rights of possession and ownership; that for the purpose of mutation in the revenue record and register, it was felt necessary that a declaration be obtained in favour of the plaintiff to the effect that he was the sole owner of 'A', 'B' and 'C' scheduled properties from 1-10-1970. The oral gift made by the defendant in presence of two competent witnesses was good enough to establish the right, title and interest of the plaintiff in the said properties, but for convenience and for the purpose of mutation, the suit was filed to obtain a declaration to the above effect.

72. Prayer in the suit was made for declaration that the plaintiff was the sole legal owner of the properties as described in schedules `A', 'B' and 'C' and that he had the legal right, title and interest in the same. From the averment of the plaint as stated hereinbefore, it is clear that the story of devolution of title upon the plaintiff (Rafi Tehrani) was clearly stated. In the plaint, it was clearly asserted that the property described in schedule 'A' to the plaint, which was the property in question was purchased in the name of Zafar Teherani (defendant No. 1), his wife-Mrs. Amena Sultana and in the benami of defendant Nos. 2 and 3. The plaintiff (Rafi Tehrani) asserted that after the gift had been made to him by his father, Zafar Teherani, he accepted the gift of 'A' scheduled property and the delivery of possession thereof was made to him on the same day and that the title deeds and the other relevant documents were also handed over to him at the time of oral gift on 1-10-1971.

<u>73. From the order sheets of the suit (Title Suit No. 31 of 1972), it appears that the summonses of the suit were duly served upon the defendants, but they did not appear, the suit was decreed ex-parte on 2-9-1972 declaring that the plaintiff was the sole legal owner of the properties shown in schedules `A-C' to the plaint and that he had right, title and interest therein. That decree is still valid. On behalf of the Government, no allegation whatsoever was made either before the Court of Settlement or before the High Court Division that the decree in the said suit (Title Suit No.31 of 1972) was obtained by Rafi Tehrani by practising fraud upon the Court or in collusion to attract the provisions section 44 of the Evidence Act. In the context, I am obliged to state that a Court or a Tribunal cannot and should not assume fact which the concerned party does not plead and fraud or collusion is surely a very big question of fact and that has to be pleaded specifically so that the adverse party may get chance to controvert or meet the same. Therefore, I do not see any scope to ignore the decree passed in Title Suit No.31 of 1972 where title of Rafi Tehrani in the property in question along with the two other properties was declared and thus to question the title of Rafi Tehrani in the property in question by oral gift from his father-Zafar Tehrani. The Court of Settlement totally failed to consider the averment made in the plaint of Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 as stated hereinbefore and totally misconceived and misinterpreted the decree passed therein and also failed to consider the legal implication of the decree passed by a competent civil Court declaring title of Rafi Tehrani in respect of the property in question along with the two other properties. In the plaint of Title Suit No.31 of 1972, the date of oral gift by Zafar Tehrani in favour of Rafi Tehrani was specifically mentioned being 1-10-1971, but the Court of Settlement observed that in the case petition, it was not mentioned when Zafar Tehrani made the oral gift inasmuch as when the said fact was stated in the plaint of the suit which was decreed, it was not at all necessary to state the said fact in the case petition. In the context, it is very pertinent to state that the fact of obtaining decree by Rafi Tehrani in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 of the Court of Sub-ordinate Judge, third Court, Dhaka was specifically stated in the case petition. In view of the above, the Court of Settlement acted beyond its jurisdiction in questioning the propriety of the decree passed in the suit (Title Suit No. 31 of 1972), as the Ordinance has not vested it with the power to sit over the decree of a civil Court. The Ordinance vested the Court of Settlement with the only jurisdiction to see whether a building, here the property in question enlisted in the list of abandoned buildings vested in the Government as an abandoned property within the meaning of PO 16 of 1972 and whether the same was liable to be excluded from the list of the abandoned buildings. The Court of Settlement also manifestly erred in observing that Hosne Ara Begum, petitioner No.7, "deposing as PW-1" save and except stating that "her husband gifted her the case property orally on 3-9-1972", said nothing more as to how the case property was acquired by her husband, Rafi Tehrani inasmuch as in view of the decree passed by the civil Court in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972, no other statement was necessary. The Court of Settlement also failed to consider another important and pertinent fact that it was only the two sisters of Rafi Tehrani, named Nargis Khanurn and Rokeya Sultana who could challenge or contest the claim of Rafi Tehrani as to his acquisition of title in the property in question by an oral gift by his father who claimed to have purchased the same in his own name, in the name of his wife and in the benami of his daughters (wife had died in the meantime). Though they were made parties in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 of the Court of Subordinate Judge, Third Court, Dhaka, they neither appeared nor contested the suit. In view of the above, my irresistible conclusion is that Rafi Tehrani was the exclusive owner of the property in question.</u>

74. Now the most relevant and important question to be seen is whether Rafi Tehrani was present in Bangladesh or whether his whereabouts was not known during the relevant period, i.e. 26th March, 1971 till 28th February, 1972 when PO 16 of 1972 was promulgated and whether he had left the property in question uncared as stated by the Government.

75. Rafi Tehrani was present in Bangladesh during the relevant period (26th March, 1971-28th February, 1972) is clear from the fact that he filed Title Suit No.31 of 1972 in the Court of Subordinate Judge, Third Court, Dhaka on 11-5-1972 and deposed in the suit on commission before Mr. Zinnat Ali, learned Advocate Commissioner on 28-8-1972, to prove his case. Before the Advocate Commissioner, Rafi Tehrani was identified by Mr. Enayet Hossain Khan, a learned Advocate of this Court and he stated in his deposition as under:

"I am the only son of my parents. The name of my mother is Amina Sultana, we migrated to Dacca from Barma in the year 1942 and since then we are permanently settled here. My present nationality is Bangladesh holding passort No.1376/12 dt. 17-5-72, we are governed by Muslim personal law. My father and mother were the owners of scheduled 'A' properties. Those Properties were purchase and by my parents partly in their own name and partly in the benami of defdt No. 2 and 3. My mother died on 25th September, 1971. I inherited the properties later behind by my mother.

The properties belonging to my father in the 'A' schedule gifted to me on 1-10-71. It was an oral gift in presence of Md.. Majid Talukdar and Mr. Ruhul Amin at present general Manager of Uttara Bank. So, after this gift I became the full owner of 'A' schedule properties. Since the gift I have been possession of the properties. At the time of delivery of possession the documents relating to the properties were also handed over to me. The aforesaid witnesses were also present at the time of delivery of possession I accepted the gift.

The 'B' schedule properties belonged to my father and he gifted the same to me on the same time and in presence of the same witnesses. The documents of the properties were also handed over to me. I am in possession of these properties through my tenents namely the communist party of Bangladesh. The property was given in rent to the communist party of Bangladesh by me on 27-12-71 as per lease document executed by both the parties.

The schedule 'C' properties were also gifted to me by my father. This property partly belonged to my mother which portion I inherited after her death. So, I am now the full owner of the 'C' schedule property also partly by inheritance and partly by gift I have become the full owner of the schedule `A"B' & 'C' properties. I have filed this suit for declaration in order to effectuate mutation and other changes in the Record of Rights, I pray for decree in this suit accordingly.

Exhibits : `A-1', 'A-2', 'A-3', 'A-4', 'A-5', `A-6' and `A-7'.

These are the documents which were handed over to me along with other papers by my father at the time of gift. I am producing all these documents from my custody."

76. It may be stated that as the deposition of Rafi Tehrani was recorded on commission, he was identified by his learned Advocate, Mr. Eanayet Hossain Khan before the Advocate Commissioner, Mr. Zinnat Ali and this the normal practice in a civil litigation in which deposition of a witness is taken on commission.

77. From the deposition of Rafi Tehrani as quoted hereinbefore, it prima facie shows that he was present in Bangladesh during the relevant period and he asserted that after the oral gift had been made to him on 1-10-1971 in respect of the property in question along with two other properties, he accepted the same and the possession of the gifted properties was given to him and he also mentioned the name of the witnesses in whose presence the oral gift was made and one of the witnesses was Mr. Ruhul Amin who became the General Manager of Uttara Bank. The very assertion in his deposition that he was also holding an international passport issued by the Government of Bangladesh, prima facie proved that had he not been present in Bangladesh during the relevant time, then the question of issuing an international passport by the Government of Bangladesh in his name in 1972, would not have arisen.

78. It further appears that in connection with the prayer made by Rafi Tehrani to the then Officer-in-charge of Abandoned Properties for releasing house No. 21/1 Purana Paltan, Case No.1044/ap(Ramna)/1972 was started. In connection with the said prayer, Rafi Tehrani was asked to appear before him on 16-11-1972 with all the papers to prove his ownership and accordingly, he appeared before him personally on 25-11-1972 and he was identified by Mr. Enayet Hossain Khan, learned Advocate. By the order made on the said date decision was taken to drop the said house (21/1 Purana Paltan) from the list of abandoned properties as the same was not an abandoned property. In the order dated 25-11-1972, it was specifically mentioned that the owner of the house (21/1 Purana Paltan), Mohd. Rafi Tehrani, produced his international passport being No.A030853 issued by the Deputy Director Immigration and Passport, Government of Bangladesh, Dhaka and that he was a "Bangladeshi by national." In the order, the fact of gift of the house (21/1 Purana Paltan) by Jafar Tehrani in favour of Rafi Tehrani and the decree passed by the learned Subordinate Judge, Third Court, Dhaka in Title Suit No.31 of 1972 declaring his sixteen annas title therein were taken note of.

79. The order of the Officer-in-charge made on 25-11-1972 was approved by the Sub-Divisional Officer on 5-12-1972 with the endorsement "As proposed." Pursuant to the said decision of the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar (South), Dhaka, a letter was issued to the Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Public Works and Urban Development, Abandoned Property Branch, Government of Bangladesh, vide Memo No.2915/ 1(1) AP/2/72 dated 23.12.1972 with reference to his Memo vide No.2P(V)-23/72/1258 dated 23-6-1972 clearly stating that on examination of the relevant papers and documents produced by Md.. Rafi Tehrani, it was proved that he was the owner of House No.21/1, Purana Paltan, Dhaka (B scheduled property of Title Suit No. 31 of 1972) who was a Bangladeshi national hence the "house in question is not an abandoned property within the meaning of PO No. 16 of 1972" and as such, the house was dropped from the list of abandoned property. In the said letter, it was further stated that from the record, it appeared that the house was allotted in favour of Jatia Sramik League vide the Memo under reference and request was made to cancel the allotment order with intimation to his office so that the possession of the same could be restored to its owner immediately. I consider it better to quote the said Memo in its entirety which reads as follows:

"Government of Bangladesh

Office of the Sub-Divisional Officer

Sadar (South) (Abandoned Property Cell) Dacca

Memo No.

dated:

To

The Deputy Secretary Ministry of Public Works and Urban Development, Abandoned Property Branch, Government of Bangladesh, Dacca.

Subject: House No. 21/1, Purana Paltan, Dacca. Ref : His memo No.2P(V)-23/72/1258 dated 23-6-72.

On examination of relevant papers and documents produced by Mr Mohd. Rafi Tehrani it has been proved that he is the owner of House 21/1, Purana Paltan, Dacca, who is a Bangladeshi national hence the house in question is not an abandoned property within the meaning of PO No.16 of 1972 and as such the house is dropped from the list of abandoned Property. But it appears from our office record that the house has been allotted in favour of Jatio Shramik League vide his memo referred to above.

He is, therefore, requested to kindly cancel the allotment order with and intimation to this office, so that the possession of the same may be restored to its owner immediately.

Sd/-

Sub-Divisional Officer

Sadar (South) Dacca

Memo No. 2915/1(1) AP/2/72 						Date : 23-12-72

Copy forwarded to Mr. Md.. Rafi Tehrani for information.

Sd/-

Signature

dated 23-12-72

Sub-Divisional Officer,

Sadar (South), Dacca."

80. This order of the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar (South), Dhaka dropping house 21/1, Purana Paltan, from the list of abandoned property, has never been disowned or claimed to be fraudulent or collusive one by the Government-respondent at any point of time either before the Court of Settlement or before the High Court Division even before this Court. In the concise statement of the Government-respondent not a word has been said challenging or castigating the order of the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Sadar (South), Dhaka releasing the property of Purana Paltan from the list of abandoned property in any manner whatsoever not to speak of obtaining the same by any deceitful means or by exercising undue influence or otherwise; though leave was granted to consider the said fact which was overlooked both by the Court of Settlement and the High Court Division. A Court of law should not guess facts which are totally foreign in a case. Thus, it is clear that, in fact, the fact of releasing the property of Purana Paltan in favour of Rafi Tehrani has been admitted by the Government. In the context, it is necessary to state that Md.. Shahidul Islam (appellant No.1), in his deposition before the Court of Settlement, specifically stated about the order dated 25-11-1972 made by the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar (South), Dhaka and the same was marked as exhibit-3(Ka) and in cross-examination made by the Government, the authenticity and genuineness of the same was not at all challenged or questioned. Therefore, I failed to understand how the property of the same owner, namely, Rafi Tehrani of 5 Bara Maghbazar presently 70-71, Outer Circular Road, could be treated as an abandoned property on the plea that the same answered the description of an abandoned property within the meaning of article 2(1) of PO No.16 of 1972 as the whereabouts of Rafi Tehrani during the relevant period, i. e. 26-3-1971 to 28-2-1972 was not known. The Government cannot be allowed to approbate and reprobate and it cannot be allowed to take two different contradictory stands in respect of the properties of the same person, here, Rafi Tehrani as per its convenience, i.e. it will declare one property of an owner as not an abandoned property and at the same time to declare another property as abandoned property and a Court of law should not be a party to such rule of convenience of the Government. In the context, it is necessary to state that the Government failed to disclose any characteristics to form its basis that the property in question became an abandoned property, particularly, when the property of Purana Paltan of Rafi Tehrani was released as not being an abandoned property. Unfortunately, the Court of Settlement did not say a word about the order made by the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar (South), Dhaka releasing house 21/1, Purana Paltan, Dhaka in favour of Rafi Tehrani though the said fact was very much brought to the notice of the Court of Settlement and was obviously argued. The High Court Division also totally failed to consider the order made by the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar (South), Dhaka releasing the property of Purana Paltan in favour of Rafi Tehrani, he being a Bangladeshi national though the said fact was specifically stated in the writ petition and the order of the Sub-Divisional Officer was annexed thereto. At the risk of repetition, it is stated that the Government did not file any affidavit-in-opposition before the High Court Division denying the said assertion of the appellants and in the concise statement as well the fact of declaring the property of Purana Paltan of Rafi Tehrani as not being an abandoned property has not been denied.

81. In this regard, it is very pertinent and relevant to state that the property described in schedule-'C' to the plaint of Title Suit No.31 of 1972 was the property appertaining to Dhaka Collectorate Touzi No. 4827, Mouza Kawehakari 414, Khatian No.4/23, eastern portion of Plot No. 1948, area 1.65 acres and of Touzi Nos. 27/ 5397/ 4827 Khatian Nos.377/12 and 4/13, Plot No. 1940, area 0.9 acre total area being 1.74 acres with one semi-pucca tin roofed house and bounded with pucca pillars and barbed wires at Kaliakair was never enlisted as an abandoned property and Hosne Ara Begum (appellant No. 7) specifically asserted that she was in possession thereof.

82. The Court of Settlement doubted the acquisition of title by Rafi Tehrani and Hosne Ara Begum (appellant No.7) to the property in question on the observation that the khatians filed by firisti were the certified copies obtained on different dates after 1980 and that "If Rafi Tehrani and Hosne Ara got property getting delivery of possession, then they might produce original Khatians." In making the said observation, the Court of Settlement was totally oblivious of the fact that the Government did not at all challenge the ownership of Rafi Tehrani. Moreso, the Government did not at all challenge the genuineness or truthfulness of the khatians filed by the petitioners before it (the Court of Settlement). Further mere failure to file the originals of the khatians could not be ipsofacto disproved the acquisition of title of Rafi Tehrani in the property in question. The Court of Settlement also failed to consider that the Government did not at all challenge the fact that Rafi Tehrani was not the son of Zafar Tehrani and that in support of the case of the purchase of the property in question by Zafar Tehrani in his own name and in the name of his wife and daughters registered deeds were filed and in the context, it also failed to consider the legal inference and impact of the decree passed in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 where the title of Rafi Tehrani to the property in question along with two other properties, one being 21/1 Purana Paltan was declared.

83. The Court of Settlement was equally wrong in making observation that "We are kept in darkness about Zafar Teherani. On perusal of this petition in which Hosne Ara Begum is petitioner No. 7, we find that Zafar Teherani made oral gift in favour of Rafi Teherani who again made oral gift and gift in writing in favour of Hosne Ara Begum. When Zafar Teherani made oral gift in favour of Rafi Teherani has not been mentioned in the case petition. Again what happened with Zafar Teherani is also not known. Whether he died here or died elsewhere out of the country is also not known as nothing on this matter was produced in the Court. Thus the question of inheritance from Zafar Teherani as mentioned plaint in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 does not arise at all. This chronologically it comes down that the acquisition of this property by Zafar Tehrani, Rafi Teherani and Hosne Ara Begum (Before and after commencement of PO 16 of 1972) are in the mist and hence not true" in as much as the Government never challenged the ownership of Rafi Tehrani, son of Zafar Tehrani and the Ordinance did not also vest it (the Court of Settlement) with the authority and jurisdiction to inquire or investigate beyond the case of the Government and to sit over the decree of the civil Court. The above quoted observation of the Court of Settlement shows that it was bent upon any how to reject the claim of the appellants to exclude the property in question from the list of abandoned building though the same did not answer the description of an abandoned property. In making the above quoted observation, in fact, the Court of Settlement made out a third case by making a reference to the whereabouts of Zafar Teherani. However, in the context, it is necessary to state that in the plaint of Title Suit No.31 of 1972, it was specifically stated that Zafar Tehrani made the oral gift in favour of Rafi Tehrani on I -10-1971 and Hosne Ara Begum in her examination-in-chief categorically stated that her father-in-law (Zafar Tehrani) died in Bangladesh in the last part of 1972. And in the face of the decree passed in Title Suit No.31 of 1972, there was no scope to question the title of Rafi Tehrani in the property in question, particularly, when the respondent-Government did not raise any dispute about the ownership of Rafi Tehrani as pointed out earlier.

84. For the discussions made above, my irresistible conclusion is that Rafi Tehrani was the exclusive owner of the property in question and he was very much present in Bangladesh during the relevant period, i.e. from 26th March, 1971 to 28th February, 1972 and that he was a Bangladesh national holding a Bangladesh Passport, so the property in question did not answer the description of an abandoned property within the meaning of article 2(1) of PO 16 of 1972 and the same did not vest in. the Government. Therefore, the property in question could not be treated as an abandoned property and consequently could not be enlisted in the list of abandoned buildings pursuant to the provisions of the Ordinance.

85. Now, the question that remains to be thrashed out is whether Hosne Ara Begum, appellant No.7, acquired any title to the property in question or not from her husband, Rafi Tehrani. Hosne Ara Begum claimed that Rafi Tehrani married her on 30-3-1970 and he (Rafi Tehrani) made an oral gift of the property in question in her favour on 3-9-1972 and that she accepted the oral gift and took physical possession thereof in presence of the witnesses. Hosne Ara Begum further asserted that oral gift was confirmed by a written deed dated 18-10-1972.

86. In support of her marriage, Hosne Ara Begum produced the kabinnama in original before the Court of Settlement. Kabinnama was also produced before the High Court Division. Kabinnama has also been included in the main paper book of this appeal. Kabinnama shows that Rafi Tehrani, son of Zafar Tehrani, married Hosne Ara Begum, daughter of Akkas Mia of 277/2, Azimpur, Lalbag Road. In the kabinnama, the address of Rafi Tehrani was shown at House No.5, Bara Maghbazar, Ispahani Colony, Dhaka. In the kabinnama, Rafi Tehrani has been clearly stated as the son of Zafar Tehrani. In the Kabinnama, the address of Hosne Ara Begum was mentioned at 277/2 Azimpur, being the address of her father which is quite natural. In her deposition before the Court of Settlement, Hosne Ara Begum categorically stated that she was married to Rafi Tehrani on 30-3-1970. She specifically asserted that in the kabinnama, there were signatures of Rafi Tehrani and herself. The original kabinnama was proved and marked as exhibit-1(ka). In Title Suit No.31 of 1972, the address of Rafi Tehrani was clearly mentioned as 5 Maghbazar, i.e. the property in question, but the Court of Settlement disbelieved the address on the ground that in the deposition of Rafi Teherani which was taken on commission by learned Advocate, Mr. Md.. Jinnat Ali in Title Suit No.31 of 1972 on 27-8-1972, his address was shown at CFSA, 46 Road No.116, Gulshan, Dhaka completely ignoring the fact that the com-mission as to the recording of deposition of a plaintiff can be held at any address. And merely because the commission in taking his deposition was held at a different place ipso facto did not disprove that Rafi Tehrani did not live at 5 Maghbazar. The Code of Civil Procedure has not also mandated that the holding of commission to record the deposition of a plaintiff must be done at the suit property or at the address given in the plaint. In this regard, it may be stated that before this Court, the learned Counsel for the appellants has argued that the commission in Title Suit No. 31 of 1972 was held at Gulshan address that being the working place of Rafi Tehrani at the relevant time. In the written submission filed on behalf of the appellant the same fact has been categorically stated. It has been stated that at the relevant time, Rafi Teherani was the Manager of JH Royner (Eastern) Ltd for Bangladesh, Burma and Nepal having office at CESA 46, Rd No.116, Gulshan Dhaka and this address was used when his deposition was recorded on commission. And we get support of this fact from the series of correspondences between Rafi Tehrani and JH (Eastern) Ltd. London office. These correspondences were proved in Title Suit No. 367 of 1981 as exhibits-'17(g)', '17(Ka)' and `17(L)' (these exhibits have been filed in the main paper book) (the decision of the Court of Settlement was given on 28-12-1994).

87. The Court of Settlement in a circuitous way disbelieved the marriage of Hosne Ara Begum with Rafi Tehrani and the gift made by him in favour of Hosne Ara Begum on the ground that the difference between the signature of Rafi Tehrani appearing in the kabinnama of the marriage between him and Hosne Ara Begum and the signature in the deed of gift "exposes Hosne Ara to falsehood." The above finding of the Court of Settlement is absolutely bereft of any factual basis and based on imagination and surmise inasmuch as it did not say how and in what manner the signature of Rafi Tehrani having appeared in the kabinnama and in the deed of gift differed. It appeared to me that the Court of Settlement made the said remark in a very casual manner without considering the serious social impact that would have on Hosne Ara Begum and her daughter, Hasina Tehrani apart from the claim of ownership to the property in question. When Hosne Ara Begum categorically stated in her deposition that she was married to Rafi Tehrani on 30-3-1970 and in support of marriage she produced the kabinnama asserting that in the kabinnama, there were signatures of Rafi Tehrani and herself and since the Court of Settlement allegedly found difference between the signatures of Rafi Tehrani having appeared in the kabinanama and in the deed of gift, it was its obligation to point the mode and manner of difference, but it did not. In the context, the most relevant and pertinent fact is that in Title Suit No.367 of 1981 of the Court of Subordinate Judge, Third Court, Dhaka filed by appellant

No.7, Hosne Ara Begum and 5(five) others against Md.. Jahangir Alam Khan and 23 (twenty three) others for declaratory decrees and for recovery of khas possession, similar objection was raised and the signatures of Rafi Tehrani having appeared on various documents with those of his signatures having appeared in the kabinnama and the deed of gift were sent to the Hand Writing Expert of Criminal Investigation Department for his opinion. It may further be stated that the Bureau of Anti-Corruption through its Inspector even seized the specimen signature of Rafi Tehrani from the then Muslim Commercial Bank, now Rupali Bank to take the opinion of the Hand Writing Expert. And the Hand Writing Expert opined that the signatures of Rafi Tehrani appearing in the nikanama and the deed of gift were genuine. The other ground on which the Court of Settlement found fault with the kabinnama and thus doubted the very marriage of Hosne Ara Begum with Rafi Tehrani was that although the property in question is at House No.5, Bara Maghbazar, the address of Rafi Tehrani in the kabinnama was shown at House No.5, Bara Maghbazar, Ispahani Colony completely ignoring the fact that because of using of a different address in the kabinnama, a marriage cannot be said to be disproved. Hosne Ara Begum in her deposition before the Court of Settlement categorically asserted the fact of her marriage with Rafi Tehrani on 30-3-1970 and the registration of the nikanama on 31-1-1972. She further asserted that in the kabinnama, there were signatures of herself and Rail Tehrani and in view of the opinion of the Hand Writing Expert that the signatures of Rafi Tehrani having appeared in the kabinnama and the deed of gift were of Rafi Tehrani, there was no scope of doubting the marriage of Hosne Ara Begum with Rafi Tehrani (the opinion of the Hand Writing Expert and the deposition of the CID Inspector have been included in the main paper book and in the additional paper book dated 22-11-2011 pages 269 and 172-175 respectively).

88. The further claim of Hosne Ara Begum is that Rafi Tehrani made an oral gift of the property in question in her favour on 3rd September, 1972 and also made a written gift to that effect on 18-10-972, Hosne Ara Begum filed Title Suit No.425 of 1978 in the Court of Subordinate Judge, First Court, Dhaka to confirm the oral gift made by her husband in her favour and obtained a decree on 06-5-1980. In the suit, her husband-Rafi Tehrani showing his present address in London was made defendant No.1 . The said suit was decreed ex-parte and her title to the property in question along with 2 (two) other properties, one at 21/1, Purana Paltan, Dhaka and the other at Kaliakar was declared. Thereafter, Hosne Ara got her name mutated in the revenue record and paid rents and she transferred some land to appellant Nos. 1 -6 and 8 who got municipal holding number in respect of their respective portion of the land and they are paying all the taxes and bills etc. in respect of the property in question and till date the decree passed in Title Suit No.425 of 1978 is in force. Neither Rafi Tehrani nor any one has challenged the propriety of the said decree in any manner. Hosne Ara Begum in her deposition before the Court of Settlement categorically stated about the decree obtained by her in the said suit. During cross-examination, both the Government and the rival claimant challenged the decree passed in Title Suit No.425 of 1978 as collusive and fraudulent and no suggestion was ever given her to that effect, so there is no scope to doubt the propriety of the decree passed in Title Suit No.425 of 1978. The Court of Settlement overlooked the decree passed in the said suit on the comment that on perusal of the plaint, it appeared that Hosne Ara Begum resorted to "falsehood and fabrication" as nowhere in the plaint of that suit, the fact of written gift "is found but in the case petition as well as in her deposition PW 1 -Hosne Ara Begum said that a written gift was given to her by her husband, Rafi Tehrani on 18-10-1972. If there was any written document on gift, then the plaintiff could disclose it in the plaint of that suit. Thus, we firmly hold that there was no existence of any written document on gift, so the plaint was filed without disclosing any fact on written gift."

89. In holding so, the Court of Settlement totally misconceived and misconstrued the case of Hosne Ara Begum. The Court of Settlement failed to consider and comprehend that although the case of Hosne Ara Begum was that Rafi Tehrani made an oral gift of the property in question in her favour on 3-9-1972 and then a written deed of gift was made on 18-10-1972 and she also said so in her deposition before the Court of Settlement. In the plaint of Title Suit No.425 of 1978, Hosne Ara Begum clearly asserted the said fact of oral gift by her husband, Rafi Tehrani in her favour. The Court of Settlement found fault with the title of Hosne Ara Begum in the property in question for non-mentioning the fact of making the written gift by Rafi Tehrani in her favour in the plaint of Title Suit No.425 of 1978. In finding such fault, it totally failed to consider the legal implication that after the oral gift was made on 3-9-1972 and the same was acted upon, it was absolutely unnecessary to make any written gift and mere non-mentioning or omission to state such fact in the plaint of Title Suit No.425 of 1978 could in no way be construed to be "falsehood and fabrication", such finding is absolutely perverse. It is pertinent to state that the Court of Settlement did not say that the decree in Title Suit No.425 of 1978 was obtained by Hosne Ara Begum fraudulently or collusively. In the context, I do not find anything wrong on the part of Hosne Ara Begum to file the suit (Title Suit No.425 of 1978) for declaration that she was the sixteen annas owner of the suit land (which also included the property in question) inasmuch as the decree passed by the civil Court declaring title of a person to a property strengthened his/her right to a property in a case of oral gift.

90. The Court of Settlement also misread and misconstrued the alleged written gift dated 18-10-1972. A mere perusal of the said written deed of gift dated 18-10-1972 shows that the fact of oral gift made on 3-9-1972 was categorically mentioned therein and reading the same as a whole, it would appear that the same was made to keep the fact of oral gift on record and the same was made as the donor had to leave Bangladesh for UK for his business purpose. The very recitals made in the written gift shows that the oral gift made on 03-9-1972 was accepted by the donee, Hosne Ara Begum and it was acted upon. It is better to quote the entire deed of gift which read as follows:

"DEED OF GIFT

This Deed of Gift is made this the 18th day of October, 1972

BETWEEN

MR MD. RAFI TEHRANY son of Mr. Md.. Jafar Tehrani, residing at 5, Maghbazar, PS Ramna, Dacca hereinafter called the Donor of the One Part.

AND

MRS HUSNA ARA BEGUM wife of Mr. Md. Rafi Tehrany residing at 277/2, Azimpur Road, PS Lalbag, Dacca hereinafter called the Donee.

WHEREAS the Donee is the wife of the Donor and he loves her much and the Donee takes good gare of the Donor and both are very much affectionate to each other;

AND WHEREAS the Donor was owner of the Properties described in the schedules hereto; the Donor out of his love and affection for donee and in consideration of Donor, the Donor was desirous of making a Heba in favour of the Donee of his properties described in the schedule below.

AND WHEREAS the oral Heba was made in favour of Donee on 3-9-1972 in presence of the witnesses in respect of the scheduled below properties and the same was duly accepted by the donee and acted upon and the possession of the scheduled below properties were duly delivered by the Donor to the Donee.

AND WHEREAS the Donor was residing at 5, Magh Bazar, P.S. Ramna, Dacca where the scheduled below moveable articles were kept for use of Donor and Donee.

AND WHEREAS it is necessary immediately to kept the said fact of Heba on record as the donor had to leave for UK for business purposes. Now this deed of Heba witnessed.

1) In consideration of the love and affection of the Donor for the Donee and in consideration of Donor money of the Donee, the Donor hereby virtue of Heba transferred in favour of the Donee free from all encumbrances of the properties described in the schedule hereto and valued at Taka 1100 to hold the same to the Donee absolutely forever."

(then the three properties have been mentioned in the schedule to the deed as schedule 'A', '13' and 'C' including the movables in a separate schedule ad schedule-'A' is the property in question).

91. The Court of Settlement also failed to consider the deposition of Hosne Ara Begum that written deed of gift was submitted in the civil Court. Since the oral gift made on 3-9-1972 by Rafi Tehrani in faovur of Hosne Ara Begum was acted upon, the learned Advocate who drafted the plaint of Title Suit No. 425 of 1978 rightly omitted to mention about the written gift. And by such omission in the plaint, the case of Hosne Ara Begum as to the acquisition of her title to the property in question by oral gift could in no way be negatived or disbelieved and the decree passed in Title Suit No.425 of 1978 could be ignored. The decree passed in this suit could be ignored or avoided within the meaning of section 44 of the Evidence Act having any fraud or collusion be established in obtaining the same, but as stated hereinbefore, such a case was never made out either by the Government or by the rival claimants. The Court of Settlement on total non-application of mind to the case of Hosne Ara Begum as to the acquisition of title to the property in question by oral gift and on misinterpretation and misconception of the law of oral gift under Mohammedan Law came to a wrong conclusion that "when gift by way of written document goes away and is disbelieved, then the fact of oral gift is disbelieved accordingly. When acquisition of property by Hosne Ara is doubtful, then everything is doubtful." In making the above quoted observation, the Court of Settlement made a fundamental mistake that the fact of oral gift took place first and then the written gift was made just as a reconfirmation of the oral gift made earlier and even if there was no written gift, that, in no way, could nullify the oral gift which had already been acted upon. The conclusion of the Court of Settlement that "These all taken together show that Rafi Tehrani never gifted the case property in favour of Hosne Ara Begum. The paper, namely, deed of gift has been manufactured, created, ante-dated and forged for the purpose of illegally grabbing the case property", is the result of sheer non application of mind to the case of Hosne Ara Begum, misreading, misconstruction of the documents filed before it, misconception of the provisions of oral gift under Mohammedan Law and on mere surmises and conjectures without any factual basis.

92. The Court of Settlement by showing silly argument that although Rafi Tehrani was the resident of 5 Maghbazar, granted the document of gift in favour of his wife, Hosne Ara Begum showing her as resident of 277/2 Azimpur, Lalbag, Dhaka and that meant that Hosne Ara

Begum never lived with Rafi Tehrani and "It thus appears from the above that no delivery of possession has taken place" ignoring the fact that 277/2 Azimpur, Lalbag, Dhaka was the address of her father and also ignoring the legal position that after the oral gift was acted upon the address of Hosne Ara Begum mentioned in an unnecessary or superfluous document, namely, the deed of gift could in no way nullify the same and therefore her case of acquisition of title of the property in question on the basis of oral gift made on 3-9-1972 by her husband, Rafi Tehrani cannot be doubted. The Court of Settlement also failed to consider that when Rafi Tehrani in the written gift admitted the fact of oral gift and the further fact that the same was acted upon mere using an address other than the property in question therein would not automatically make the oral gift false or disproved. And because of the use of a different address other than the property in question, in the deed of gift, it cannot be said that Hosne Ara Begum did not reside in the property in question, namely, 5 Maghbazar. In the context, the Court of Settlement also failed to consider that in the birth certificate of her daughter issued by the Registrar Gynac, Dhaka Medical College Hospital on 13-10-1981, Hosne Ara Begum was specifically described as the wife of Md.. Rafi Tehrani and this fortifies the case of Hosne Ara Begum that she was the wife of Rafi Tehrani. Hosne Ara Begum in her deposition categorically stated that she gave birth to a female child on 21-6-1972 at cabin No. 19, Dhaka Medical College Hospital. The Court of Settlement also ignored the testimony of Hasina Tehrani, daughter of Hosne Ara Begum who was examined in the case as PW 2. She (Hasina Tehrani) in unequivocal language stated that the name of her father was Rafi Tehrani who lived in London and that she had communication with her father through letters and her father had left for London while she was '3/312/1' years old. she further asserted that her father again married in London and built house there and kept her with her mother and gave his property to them. It is very pertinent to state that PW 2 was not at all cross-examined to dislodge the fact asserted by her that Rafi Tehrani was her father and that he had left for London while she was '3/31 2/1'years old. It is also significant to note that on behalf of the Government, no cross-examination was made to her (PW 2) and it was the petitioners of Case No.986 of 1988-595 of 1988 who cross-examined her. It will be clear if the entire cross-examination of PW 2 is looked into which reads as follows:

"x x x (৯৮৬/৮৮-৫৯৫/৮৮ এর প্রার্থী)

আমার বয়স ৩/৩. ২/১ বয়সে শেষ বাবাকে দেখেছি। বাবার ছবি আছে তবে এখন কাছে নাই। পত্র পড়লে আব্বার দুঃখ আছে বলে মনে হয়। তিনি লন্ডনে বিয়ে করেছেন। বাড়ী করেছেন। আমার মার কাছে আমাকে রেখে গেছেন। জমি জমা আমাদের দিয়ে গেছেন।”

93. According to the birth certificate issued by Dhaka Medical College Hospital, Hasina Tehrani was born on 21-6-1972 and if Rafi Tehrani had left for London at the age of '3/31 2/1', then it would be seen that Rafi Tehrani was in Bangladesh upto 1975 and this corroborates the testimony of Hosne Ara Begum (PW1) that Rafi Tehrani had left for London in the month of August, 1975 and substantiated the case of the appellants that during the relevant time and subsequently also, i.e. upto August, 1975, Rafi Tehrani was in Bangladesh and he never left the property in question keeping the same uncared as claimed by the Government.

94. Mr. M Amir-ul Islam has also pointed that in the notice issued by the High Court Division dated 24-5-1987 in Civil Rule 107(R) of 1987, Hosne Ara Begum was clearly described as the wife of Rafi Tehrani and this also showed that Rafi Tehrani was the husband of Hosne Ara Begum.

95. The Court of Settlement disbelieved the appellants' case of possession in the property in question firstly by Rafi Tehrani and then by Hosne Ara Begum giving reference to the case of the petitioner in Case No.586 of 1988 who stated that Rafi Tehrani never possessed the "case property" and that PW 1, Abdus Sobhan, in that case (Case No.586 of 1988) stated that he had heard that Rafi Tehrani lived in the Ispahani Colony, but there was no Ispahani Colony. The Court of Settlement also referred to the case of the other petitioners, namely, Case Nos.587, 588, 589, 590, 591, 592. 593, 594 and 595 all of 1988 (they were the transferees from Abdus Sobhan, appellant of CA No.77 of 1977) that Hosne Ara Begum never lived in the "case property' completely ignoring that they were the rival claimants and they were all to injure her by creating a cloud and confusion about her title in the property in question as well as its status and that the claim of the rival claimants could not disprove the possession of Rafi Tehrani and Hosne Ara Begum in the property in question as there were other positive and conclusive evidence in support of their claim of title to the property in question as well as their possession therein as discussed hereinbefore. In the context, I would like to add that merely because two rival parties claimed title to the property in question and prayed for its exclusion from the list of abandoned buildings in their favour could not oust the jurisdiction of the Court of Settlement to look into the papers/documents filed by them to decide the question whether the property in question was an abandoned property and the same vested in the Government and whether the same was liable to be excluded from the list of abandoned buildings and whether the documents produced prima facie entitled any of them to get an order of exclusion of the property in question in any one's favour without entering into the detailed enquiry as to their claim of title therein.

96. The Court of Settlement did not at all consider that Hosne Ara Begum in her examination-in-chief asserted the fact that her husband was in London and he had left for London in the same month in which Sheikh Mujib died and at that time, he (her husband) used to live in the property in question (In the deposition sheet, in Bangla, it has been recorded as "আমার স্বামী লন্ডনে আছেন। শেখ মুজিব ১৯৭৫ সালে মারা যাবার এক মাসে যান। মগবাজার বাসায় ঐ সময় থাকতেন)" and in cross-examination, she categorically asserted that during the war of liberation, Zafar Tehrani and Rafi Tehrani used to live at Maghbazar. The Court of Settlement also failed to consider the deposition of Rafi Tehrani in Title Suit No.31 of 1972 where he asserted that after the oral gift of the property in question by his father on 1-10-1971, he became its full owner and he had been possessing the same. It (the Court of Settlement) also failed to consider the decree passed in that suit in which his title to the property in question along with two other properties was declared. The Court of Settlement also failed to consider the order of the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar (South), Dhaka dated 25-11-1972 and the Memo dated 23-12-1972 sent by him to the Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Public Works and Urban Development, Abandoned Property Branch, dropping the property of Purana Paltan of Rafi Tehrani from the list of abandoned property. The Court of Settlement erroneously took adverse view as to the possession of Hosne Ara Begum in the property in question relying on a statement in her cross-examination that during the war, she lived at the residence of her father (her father's house is at 277/2, Azimpur, Lalbag, Dhaka) inasmuch as in the context of 1971, there was nothing wrong if she lived at her father's residence during that period and that fact in no way could affect her case of acquisition of title in the property in question by oral gift from her husband, Rafi Tehrani, made on 3-9-1972 which she asserted both in her examination-in-chief as well as in her cross-examination. It is very significant to state that in taking the said adverse view, the Court of Settlement did not consider the other positive assertion of Hosne Ara Begum that during the war, Zafar Tehrani, Rafi Tehrani all used to live at Maghbazar (In the deposition sheet, in bangla, it has been recorded as "যুদ্ধের সময় আমি আমার বাবার বাড়ী ছিলাম। যুদ্ধ চলাকালে জাফর তেহরানী, রফি তেহরানী সবাই মগবাজার থাকত।”). Hosne Ara Begum became the owner of the property in question by virtue of the oral gift made by Rafi Tehrani, her husband, on 03-9-1972, so her right to the property in question and possession therein could in no way be disbelieved, if she stayed at her father's residence during the liberation war, in 1971. The crucial fact in the case was whether Rafi Tehrani was in Bangladesh during the relevant period, i.e. 26th March, 1971 to 28th February, 1972 which was clearly established by the evidence of PW 1, Hosne Ara Begum, before the Court of Settlement; by the evidence of Rafi Tehrani himself in Title Suit No.31 of 1972 and the decree passed therein as well as the order of the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Sadar (South). Dhaka dropping the property of Purana Paltan of Rafi Tehrani from the list of abandoned property as discussed hereinbefore.

97. In deciding the factum of possession by Hosne Ara Begum in the property in question, the Court of Settlement failed to consider her testimony given before it that she had been in Maghbazar since the liberation of Bangladesh in proper perspective along with the other evidence as mentioned hereinbefore. Hosne Ara Begum in her deposition specifically stated that she being in possession of the property in question sold a portion of it to Shahidul Haque (appellant No. 1), Ayub (appellant No. 5), Ismail Hossain (appellant No.3), Rehana Anju (appellant No. 8), Showkat Khan (appellant No.4) and Shikha Haque and they were in possession in some portion of their purchased land and not in possession in some portion as well and she mutated her name of the remaining portion of the property in question in which she is in possession. In this respect, it is very pertinent to state that Hosne Ara Begum though stated in her deposition that Atiqur Rahman along with others illegally went into the possession (without mentioning specifically the property in question), but if her deposition is read as a whole it would appear that Atiqur Rahman and others entered into the possession of a portion of the property in question. And she along with the transferees from her already filed Title Suit No. 367 of 1981 in the Court of Subordinate Judge, Third Court, Dhaka for recovery of khas possession of the dispossessed portion from the property in question along with the prayer of their declaration of title therein and other prayers including a declaration that the ex-parte decree dated 30-4-1979 (decree signed on 4-6-1979) passed by the Subordinate Judge, First Court, Dhaka in Title Suit No. 204 of 1977 was null and void and not binding upon them. And this also shows that her claim of title to the property in question and her possession therein was bona fide and had factual basis and she had every right to pray for excluding the same from the list of abandoned buildings.

98. The Court of Settlement disbelieved the possession of the appellants with the observation that "possession and living pre-suppose the allegiance to the Government through payment of ground rent to Government and taxes to the Municipality (now City Corporation), payment of electricity, gas bills, etc. The petitioner in case Nos. 649/88 has not produced in Court any paper on these matters (sic). It is thus not ascertained that Municipal Corporation or City Corporation has recognized Zafar Tehrani or Rafi Tehrani or Hosne Ara as occupant or owner of the case property standing at 5 Maghbazar, PS Ramna, Dhaka. No paper on holding number accepting the deed of gift before this Court was produced."

99. It is true that in the depositions of Hosne Ara Begum (appellant No. 7) and Md.. Shahidul Haque Bhuiyan (purchaser from Hosne Ara Begum and appellant No. 1) who were examined in Case No. 649 of 1988 (giving rise to this appeal) they did not say about the payment of rents to the Government, payment of Municipal Tax and now City Corporation tax, payment of other bills for utility services, such as, electricity, gas, WASA, but before this Court, the documents have been filed showing that Hosne Ara Begum mutated her name with the revenue authority in respect of the property in question and she paid rents; papers have also been filed showing payment of rents by Md.. Shahidul Haque Bhuiyan (appellant No. 1), Mrs. Shikha Haque (appellant No.6), i.e. the purchasers from Hosne Ara Begum and the payment of bills for utility services, namely, electricity, gas and water supply. In the context, it may be stated that the documents have been also filed before this Court showing that Municipal holding was opened in the name of Zafar Tehrani and holding tax and other bills for utility services, such as, electricity, gas and WASA were paid in his name. The most important document produced by appellant No.1 and appellant No.6, i.e. the purchasers from Hosne Ara Begum is that the then Dhaka Improvement Authority (DIT) (now RAJUK) by its Memo dated 17-11-1982 gave them permission to construct a building in the property in question (the list of the abandoned buildings in which the property in question has been included was published in the official Gazette on 28-4-1986). The above mentioned purchasers obtained electricity supply line, took gas connection from Titas Gas Transmission and Company Limited and water supply line to their newly built houses. The approved plan has been also filed before this Court. It may be stated that in the writ petition, it was specifically stated that Hosne Ara Begum mutated her name and paid rents and those facts were not denied by the Government by filing any affidavit-in-opposition. The very fact that Hosne Ara Begum mutated her name with the revenue authority, paid rents prima facie showed that Hosne Ara Begum was in possession of the property in question when the Gazette notification was made under section 5 of the Ordinance. It is necessary to state that from the decision of the Court of Settlement, it is prima facie clear that the khatians in respect of the property in question were filed on behalf of the appellants of this appeal, but the Court of Settlement refused to consider those on the ground that the original khatians were not filed and that certified copies thereof were obtained on different dates after 1980. In the writ petition, it was also asserted that appellant No.1 (petitioner No. l in the writ petition) constructed a four-storied building and leased out the same to the National Bank of Bangladesh in 1989 and the said Bank is running a National Bank Public School and College and some of the correspondences between the Bank and appellant No.1 were annexed to the writ petition and they were marked as annexure-'C-C2', but the Government of Bangladesh, writ-respondent No.2 did not deny the said assertions by filing any affidavit-in-opposition

100. From the discussions made above, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that during the relevant period (26-3-1971 to 28-2-1972) till the property in question was transferred to Hosne Ara Begum by oral gift, Rafi Tehrani was in possession thereof as its rightful owner and then it was Hosne Ara Begum and her transferees who were in possession of the property in question when the Gazette notification enlisting the same was made under section 5 of the Ordinance. Although the Government-respondent relying on the statement of Abdus Sobhan (appellant in CA No.77 of 2003) that one Abdur Rashid, Advocate, went into the possession of the property in question immediately after liberation of the country, pleaded that as Rafi Tehrani had left the property in question, it vested in the Government as abandoned property and was leased out to him (Abdur Rashid, Advocate), not a single scrap of paper was produced either before the Court of Settlement or before the High Court Division to show that the property in question was actually leased out to him (Abdur Rashid, Advocate) and even Abdur Rashid, Advocate, did not appear before the Court of Settlement. Admittedly, the property in question was enlisted in the `Kha' list, so the Government could not remain in possession thereof. It is also an admitted fact that before enlistment of the property in question in the `Kha' list, no notice as required by section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance, was served either upon Hosne Ara Begum or her transferees.

101. The Court of Settlement was also palpably wrong in holding that as Hosne Ara Begum transferred the "entire case property", she allegedly got by way of gift "to the rest applicants by registered deeds on different dates", she had no right, title and possession therein, so she had no locus standi to file the case as petitioner No.7 and that the statement made in the petition that "applicants are always in possession" are not true, "because petitioner No. 7 has no subsistence right, title and interest in the case property after alleged sale to the rest petitioners" inasmuch as Hosne Ara Begum did not sell the entire property in question and she in her deposition categorically stated that she mutated her name in respect of the portion of the property in question of which she is in possession (in the deposition sheet, in Bangla, it has been recorded as "আমার নামে আামার দখলী অংশের নামজারী আছে”) and this assertion of P WI was not challenged in cross-examination either by the Government or by the petitioner of other cases. In taking the above view, the Court of Settlement totally misconceived and misinterpreted the meaning of the words "sold out the same" as stated in the petition; the words "sold out the same" can in no way be construed that she had sold the entire property, she got from her husband. For argument's sake, if it is conceded that Hosne Ara Begum had sold out the entire property to the other applicants, then they (the other applicants) had every locus standi to file the application under section 7 of the Ordinance to exclude the property in question from the list of abandoned buildings, they being the bona fide purchasers from her and in possession of their portion of the purchased land, but their case was not considered on the erroneous view that as "Hosne Ara Begum did not live and thereby possess the case property, so they (rest petitioners) have not got their possession in the case property from Hosne Ara Begum." In holding so the Court of Settlement failed to consider that section 7 of the Ordinance has stipulated that any person claiming any right or interest in any building which is included in any list published under section 5 may, within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of publication of the list in the official Gazette, make an application to the Court of Settlement for exclusion of the building from such list or return or restoration of the building to him or for any other relief on the ground that the building is not an abandoned property and has not been vested in the Government under PO 16 of 1972 or that his right or interest in the building has not been affected by the provisions of that order. And this failure resulted in an erroneous decision by the Court of Settlement in rejecting the claim of the transferees to exclude the property in question from the list of abandoned buildings.

102. The finding of the Court of Settlement that the transfers in favour of petitioner Nos.1-6 and 8 were hit by article 6 of PO 16 of 1972 and the kabalas were null and void under the same article is also prima facie not sustainable in view of my finding earlier that the property in question did not answer the description of an abandoned property within the meaning of article 2(1) of PO 16 of 1972 and the same did not vest in the Government.

103. For the reasons stated hereinbefore, I find substance in the 3 (three) submissions as noted earlier on which leave was granted in this appeal.

Civil Appeal No. 77 of 2003:

104. This appeal has arisen out of the decision of the Court of Settlement in Case No.586 of 1988.

105. The Court of Settlement rejected the case filed by the appellant, Abdus Sobhan, along with Case Nos. 587, 588, 589, 590, 591, 592, 593, 594 and 595 of 1988 on the finding that on perusal of the evidence of PW 1, Abdus Sobhan, it appeared that he never possessed the case property immediately before commencement of PO 16 of 1972. The Court of Settlement relying on a solitary statement of PW 1, Abdus Sobhan, in his cross-examination that one Abdur Rashid, Advocate, went into the possession of the "case property" immediately after liberation of Bangladesh held that "the case property" was an abandoned property within the meaning of article 2(1) of PO 16 of 1972 and it vested in the Government under article 4 of said PO. The Court of Settlement rejected the claim of the other petitioners in the other cases on the ground that since all the transfers to them "took place after when the case property became abandoned property and duly vested in the Government", those transfers were hit by article 6 of PO 16 of 1972. The Court of Settlement in coming to the said finding did not at all consider the assertion made by Abdus Sobhan in his examination-in-chief that the property in question was not an abandoned property and he was in possession thereof and the further fact that he filed Title Suit No.183 of 1972 in the Court of the then Munsif, First Court, Dhaka in the wake of desire of the then Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar (South), Dhaka for taking up forcible possession of the property in question on 24-7-1972 and she obtained an order of temporary injunction against the Government. The Court of Settlement also failed to consider the case of the petitioner (Case No.586 of 1988) that before promulgation of PO 16 of 1972, Parkul Tea Estate was in occupation in a portion of the property in question being holding No.71 (New) as his tenant and after 1972, Bangladesh Tea Board took over possession of Parkul Tea Estate and that the Tea Board assured him of payment of rent as tenants after the decision in Title Suit No.183 of 1972 (renumbered as Title Suit No. 926 of 1981).

106. Leave was granted in the leave petition giving rise to this appeal only to decide the propriety of the finding of the High Court Division on the question of non-service of notice upon the appellant under section 5(1) (b) of the Ordinance, as he claimed to be the lawful owner of the property in question and in possession thereof.

107. Therefore, I do not require going into the detail of the case of the appellant. And I consider it profitable to decide the question together along with the first submission on which leave was granted in the leave petition giving rise to CA No. 10 of 2003.

108. Discussions and findings on the submissions of the legal consequences of enlisting the property in question in the `Kha' list without serving notice upon the appellants under section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance for surrendering or taking possession of the property in question:

The learned Counsel appearing in the two appeals very strenuously argued that the notice as required under section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance was not served upon the occupants of the property in question asking them for surrendering or taking over possession thereof. The enlistment of the property in question in the `Kha' list was illegal and without lawful authority; the Court of Settlement ought to have excluded the property in question from the list of abandoned buildings on the said ground alone. Both the learned Counsel submitted that prior notice on or before 31 October, 1988 was a precondition of enlistment of a building in the list of abandoned buildings to give jurisdiction to the Court of Settlement. Mr. Farooqui specially submitted that a statutory notice is a `jurisdictional fact' or a 'collateral fact'. Where no such notice is issued, the Government shall take over possession of "the left-over abandoned building" in execution of a decree or order passed by a Court in a suit filed by the Government under section 4(b)(ii) of the Ordinance after the aforesaid date. This shows that a statutory notice is mandatory before a building is enlisted to give jurisdiction to the Court of Settlement and if no notice was issued, the civil Courts will have exclusive jurisdiction over the 'left-over property' under section 4(b)(ii) of the Ordinance. According to Mr. Farooqui, the Court of Settlement is a Court of stinted or limited jurisdiction, the statutory notice under article 7 of PO 16 of 1972 read with rule 3(1)(8) of the Rules, 1972 is a mandatory requirement of section 4 of the Ordinance within the statutory period expiring on the 31st day of October, 1988. After issuance of such notices, a list would be published under section 5(b) of the Ordinance. This is a list known as `Kha' or 'EV list. Such list alone gives jurisdiction to the Court of Settlement. In absence of the statutory notice which is a `jurisdictional fact' or a 'collateral fact', the Court of Settlement, an inferior tribunal, could not assume jurisdiction and enter into the merit of the case. As in the instant case, notice under section 5(1) (b) of the Ordinance was not issued; the Court of Settlement acted without jurisdiction in assuming jurisdiction under section 10 of the Ordinance and entering into the merit of the cases filed before it.

109. Both the learned Counsel have argued that PO 16 of 1972 has provided the procedure to take possession of the property 'in such manner as may be prescribed.' A statutory notice is to be served for the purpose in term of article 7 of the said PO read with Bangladesh Abandoned Property (Taking Over Possession) Rules, 1972 (shortly, the Rules, 1972). The Rules, 1972 provides the manner of taking over possession of an abandoned property under article 7 of PO 16 of 1972. A prescribed notice under rule 3(1) in Form No. 1 is to be served upon the person in possession of the property. As per rule 3(8) of the Rules, 1972, the notice shall be served on the person if possession or on any adult male member of his family or, where none of them is available or the' y refuse to receive the notice, by affixing a copy o f the notice to a conspicuous part of the residence o f such person and also, where the abandoned (property consists of any immovable property on a conspicuous part of such immovable property it the presence of two witnesses, but admitted!) neither the possession of the property in question was taken over by the Government nor any notice under section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance was serves upon the occupant for surrendering or taking over possession thereof. But the Court of Settlement as well as the High Court Division failed to consider the provisions of PO 16 of 1972 and the Ordinance with reference to the materials places 1 before them and thus erred in law in taking a wrong decision as to the prayer for exclusion of the property in question from the list of abandoned buildings in rejecting the cases and as such, the impugned judgment and order cannot be sustained.

110. Mr. Farooqui to strengthen his argument referred pp 286-287 of the celebrated treatise `Administrative Law' (seventh edition) by Wade and Forsyth which have said as follows:

"Certain mistakes of fact can carry an administrative authority or tribunal outside its jurisdiction although 'jurisdictional fact' has long been part of the currency of administrative law, English judges have previously preferred to speak of 'collateral questions'."

111. He has also referred to the classical statement from a case of 1853 in which Coleridge J said:

"Now it is a general rule, that no Court of limited jurisdiction can give itself jurisdiction by a wrong decision on a point collateral to the merits of the case upon which the limit to its jurisdiction depends, and however its decisions may be final on all particulars, making up together that subject-matter, which if true is within its jurisdiction, and, however necessary in many cases it may be (in order) to make a preliminary enquiry, whether some collateral matter be or be not within the limits, yet upon the preliminary question, its decision must always be open to inquiry in the superior Court."

112. Mr. Farooqui has also referred Justice CK Thakker c Administrative Law (1912) pages 1008-1011 to the effect—

"Lack of jurisdiction may also arise from absence of some preliminary facts, which must exist before a tribunal exercises its jurisdiction. They are known as 'jurisdictional' or `collateral' facts. The existence of these facts is a sine qua non or a condition precedent to the assumption of jurisdiction by an interior court or tribunal.  To put it simply, the fact the existence of which is necessary to the initiation of proceedings and without which the act of the court is a nullity can be said to be a "jurisdictional fact."

113. Mr. Farooqui has referred to Black's Law Dictionary where jurisdictional fact has been explained as: "jurisdictional fact" is a fact which must exist before a court can properly assume jurisdiction of a particular case. A jurisdictional fact is one, on existence or non-existence of which depends assumption or refusal to assume jurisdiction by a court, a tribunal or an authority.

114. On the question of jurisdiction, Mr. Farooqui in his written submission has also referred the case of Baldwin & Francis Ltd vs Patents Appeal Tribunal, reported in 1(1959) AC 663 at page 695 where Lord Denning has explained jurisdiction as follows:

"In some of those cases it has been said that the tribunal, in falling into an error of this particular kind, has exceeded its jurisdiction. No tribunal, it is said, has any jurisdiction to be influenced by extraneous considerations or to disregard vital matters. This is good sense and enables the court of Queen's Bench to receive evidence to prove the error. But an excess of jurisdiction in this sense is very different from want of jurisdiction altogether which is, of course, "determinable at the commencement, not at the conclusion of the inquiry" (see Reg. vs Bolton 36) Whereas an excess of jurisdiction is determinable in the course of or at the end of the inquiry. But allowing that a tribunal which falls into an error of this particular kind does exceed its jurisdiction, as I am prepared to do, never the-less I am quite clear that at the same time it falls into an error of law too: for the simple reason that it has "not determined according to law." That is, indeed, how Blackburn J. put it in Reg vs De Retzen. And the decision in the Northumberland case itself shows that, even though no evidence is given, nevertheless if such an error appears from the documents properly before the court, or by legitimate inference there from, then certiorari may be granted to quash the decision: and the certiorari can properly be said to be for error of law on the face of the proceedings. It may be excess of jurisdiction as well, but it is certainly error of law."

115. Mr. M. Amirul Islam has further argued that admittedly the Government for the purpose of putting the property in question under `Kha' list should have had documents, papers and information in order to come to a conclusion that the same was an abandoned property. Hence, there was formation of opinion as to the character of the property being abandoned property within the meaning of article 2(1) of PO 16 of 1972. Suppression and/or non-production and non-disclosure of them is sufficient ground for the Court to come to an obvious conclusion that the Government does not have any such documents, information and materials necessary for the formation of opinion that it is an abandoned property. He has further argued that the publication of the list under section 5 of the Ordinance is deemed as conclusive evidence, but non-disclosure of supporting materials on the basis of which conclusion is arrived is rebuttable and the burden is shifted on the Government to give supporting evidence for upholding the conclusion which is rebutted under the law; prior objective satisfaction on the basis of the facts leading to 'formation of opinion' before treating any property as abandoned property is a sine qua non. Section 4(b) and section 5(b) of the Ordinance re-enforces the principle of estoppel incorporating it in the law itself to be treated as statutory estoppel.

116. Mr. Islam has further argued that in the instant case, since no notice under section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance was served upon the owner of the property in question before the 31st day of March, 1986. The inclusion of the same as an abandoned property, besides being ultr vires to sections 4(b) and 5(b) of the Ordinance, is a malice in law and, in fact, thus becomes a dead letter and is beyond the scope of the Ordinance and thus violative of articles 31 and 42 of the Constitution.

117. On the question of legal consequences of the non-service of notice as contemplated under sections 4 and 5 of the Ordinance, both the learned Counsel have referred a number of cases of this Division in support of their contentions, a few of them are the Ministry of Works vs Helauddin Ahmed, 4 MLR (AD) 140, 141; Bangladesh vs Amela Khatoon, 53 DLR (AD) 55, 56; Government of Bangladesh vs Bibi Marium, 54 DLR (AD) 100, 101; Bangladesh vs Rehana Kamal, 56 DLR (AD) 1, 6; Abdur Rashid Mollah vs Bangladesh, 58 DLR (AD) 20, 22, 23 Bangladesh vs Md. Shahjahan, 2 ADC (2005) 411 413.

118. They have also cited some cases from the High Court Division. The cases are: Helal-uddin Ahmed vs Bangladesh, 2 BLC 427, and Jobon Nahar vs Bangladesh, 49 DLR 108.

119. Mr. Murad Reza, learned Additional Attorney General appearing for the Government-respondent has just supported the reasoning and the finding of the High Court Division on the point at issue.

120. Let me now examine the soundness of the submissions of the learned Counsel for the appellants as well as the learned Additional Attorney General.

121. From the decision of the Court of Settlement, it appears that it, in a very perfunctory manner, disposed of the objection of the petitioners, particularly, those of Case Nos. 586, 588, 589, 590, 591, 592, 593, 594 all of 1988 as to the non-service of notice upon them under section 5(1) (b) of the Ordinance for surrendering or taking over possession of the property in question before enlisting the same in the `Kha' list. The Court of Settlement argued that the argument as to the non-service of notice upon the petitioners "is not obviously acceptable because on perusal of the case petition", they found that the question of non-service of notice required under section 4(1) (b) of the Ordinance was not challenged in the case petition. In holding so, the Court of Settlement totally misread the statements made in the application inasmuch as in paragraph 2 of the application of the appellant in CA No. 77 of 2003, the fact of non-service of notice as contemplated in section 5(1) (b) of the Ordinance for surrendering or for taking over possession was clearly asserted. The said paragraph reads as follows:

"2.The property having never been subject to any notice by the Government or anybody on behalf of the Government for surrendering possession, as contemplated in section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance, 1985, listing of the said property thereunder is illegal and not sustainable. It is further submitted that in view of the provision contained in the proviso to section 5(1) of the Ordinance and the facts of pendency of suits as stated hereinabove, the building in question cannot be included in the list in question."

122. Besides the said objection taken by the petitioner of Case No.586 of 1988, Md.. Shahidul Haque (appellant No.1 in CA No.10 of 2003), one of the petitioners of Case No.649 of 1988, categorically stated in his examination-in-chief that he did not get any notice to surrender possession (in the deposition sheet, in Bangla, it has been recorded as: "দখল ছেড়ে দিবার কোন নোটিশ পাইনি). Abdus Sobhan also categorically stated that no notice as required under section 4 of the Ordinance was served upon him. The Court of Settlement totally failed to consider that when the statute, namely, the Ordinance puts an obligation upon the Government to undergo a process/ procedure in taking an action before enlisting of a property as an abandoned property, it was obligatory upon it to prove the said fact before the Court of Settlement which is a 'jurisdictional fact' or a 'collateral fact' to give it jurisdiction to enter into the merit of the case, i.e. to see whether the property so listed was an abandoned property and vested in the Government under PO 16 of 1972 and whether the same was liable to be excluded from the list of the abandoned buildings. The claimants who examined themselves before the Court of Settlement as witnesses having asserted that they were in possession of the property in question and that they did not get any notice for surrendering or taking over possession thereof and that the notice is surely referable to section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance and the point of such non-service having specifically been agitated before it, the Court of Settlement was obliged to decide the said fact first, or in other words, in fact, the question of non-service of notice under section 5( I )(b) of the Ordinance was the first question, the Court of Settlement ought to have decided, but it did not. Instead, it answered the question last after making the enquiry as to the ownership of the petitioners and thus acted illegally in rejecting the cases.

123. The other reason assigned by the Court of Settlement in discarding the objection as to the non-service of notice under section 5( I)(b) of the Ordinance is that section 5(2) of the Ordinance attaches a presumption of correctness of the list prepared under section 5(1) of the Ordinance completely ignoring the fact that the Government failed to produce any scrap of paper to show that it took over possession thereof and/or that notice for surrendering or taking over possession was ever served upon the occupants, namely, the appellants. In taking the said view, the Court of Settlement failed to consider that the property in question was outside the scope of mischief of section 5 of the Ordinance, in view of the fact that the Ordinance itself prohibits the taking over possession unless a statutory notice is issued before the 31st October, 1988. In the context, it may be stated that as discussed above, in PO 16 of 1972, procedure to take over possession of an abandoned property has been laid down. And according to article 7(3) of PO 16 of 1972 if a person in possession of an abandoned property failed to surrender possession thereof as he is required to do under clause (2) thereof, the Deputy Commissioner or the Sub-Divisional Officer or the authorized officer shall serve a notice on him in the prescribed manner requiring him to surrender possession of the property within seven days of the service of notice to the person mentioned in the notice or show cause against such surrender within the said period and if he fails to do so, the Deputy Commissioner or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or the authorized officer shall take possession of the property in such manner as may be prescribed of taking over possession of an abandoned property and, in fact, such procedure has been detailed in rule 3 of the Rules, 1972. And rule 3(8) of the Rules, 1972 has mandated that notice has to be served on the person in possession or on any adult male member of his family or, where none of them is available or they refuse to receive the notice, by affixing a copy of the notice to a conspicuous part of the residence of such person and also, where the abandoned property consists of any immovable property on a conspicuous part of such immovable property in the presence of two witnesses. And admittedly, in the instant case, no notice under article 7 of PO 16 of 1972 read with rule 3 of the Rules, 1972 was served. The provisions for service of notice upon the occupant of an abandoned property as provided in article 7 of PO 16 of 1972 read with rule 3 of the Rules, 1972 has, in fact, been re-introduced and re-asserted in clause (b) of section 5(1) of the Ordinance as a precondition before enlistment of a building of which the Government is not in possession and that notice for surrendering or taking over possession as abandoned property under PO 16 of 1972 had been served.

124. The Court of Settlement also failed to consider that the presumption attached to section 5 of the Ordinance is not sacrosanct and is rebuttable and in considering the presumption attached to section 5 of the Ordinance, it totally failed to consider the materials placed before it, particularly, the decree passed in Title Suit No.31 of 1972, the deposition of Rafi Tehrani in this suit, the order of the Sub-Divisional Officer, Sadar (South), Dhaka dropping the property of Purana Paltan of Rafi Tehrani from the list of abandoned buildings, the decree passed in Title Suit No.425 of 1978 of the Court of Subordinate Judge, First Court, Dhaka, the mutation khatian in the name of Hosne Ara Begum and the rent paid by her which prima facie proved that during the relevant period, i.e. 26-3-1971 to 28.021972, Rafi Tehrani was in possession of the property in question and subsequently he divested his ownership on Hosne Ara Begum, his wife, by oral gift and that she was in possession thereof. Therefore, the property in question did not answer the description of an abandoned property within the meaning of article 2(1) of PO 16 of 1972 and the presumption attached to section 5 of the Ordinance was very well rebutted. In the context, it is necessary to state that section 5 of the Ordinance does not say that to get a notice for surrendering or taking over possession as an abandoned property, one need be in possession of the entire property.

<u>125. As discussed hereinbefore, the petitioners of Case No.649 of 1988, particularly, Hosne Ara Begum conclusively proved that Rafi Tehrani, her husband, was a Bangladeshi citizen holding Bangladesh passport and was in possession of the property in question during the relevant period, i.e. from 26-3-1971 to 28-2-1972 as its rightful owner and after she had become the owner of the same by oral gift from her husband on 3-9-1972. She and her transferees were in possession thereof and therefore, they were entitled to get a notice under section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance before the inclusion of the property in question in the list of abandoned buildings. This Court in the cases of the Ministry of Works vs Helaluddin Ahmed (supra), Bangladesh vs Amela Khatun and others (supra), Government of Bangladesh vs Marium (supra), Bangladesh vs Rehana Kamal (supra), Abdur Rashid Molla vs Bangladesh (supra), Bangladesh vs Md.. Shahjahan (supra), has consistently held that statutory notice as contemplated in sections 4 and 5 of the Ordinance is a sine qua non and in the absence of such notice, the inclusion of a disputed property in the `Kha' list of the abandoned buildings is illegal and without lawful authority.</u>

<u>126. This Division in the case of Secretary, Ministry of Works and Urban Development, Government of Bangladesh vs Rowshan Ara Begum, 57 DLR (AD) 167, rejected the objection as to the non-service of notice under section 5(1) of the Ordinance on the ground that no such objection was taken either before the Court of Settlement or before the High Court Division, so this case could not be relied upon or referred to as an authority on the question of non-service of notice under section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance as sought to be relied upon by the learned Additional Attorney General. A review of this judgment was sought and this Division in the review held that "In the instant case the petitioner having not been able to establish before the Court of Settlement that the claimant of the property or for that matter her vendor Anwari Khatun were present in Bangladesh on 28-2-1972 and consequent thereupon the property having had assumed the character of abandoned property, the listing of the property in question, even if without service of notice as per provision of Ordinance No. 54 of 1985, is not material as the property because of non-service of notice for listing in the list of abandoned properties would not cease to be an abandoned property and consequent thereupon the claim of title made by the petitioner in the property in question is not legally sustainable or, in other words, the petitioner cannot raise any claim of title in the property in question since said property is an abandoned property. The ground contending which review of our judgment is sought merits no consideration." And in taking the said view, the earlier decisions of this Court as mentioned hereinbefore, were not at all taken into consideration. So this judgment can be termed to be a judgment per in curium and does not constitute a precedent. In the context, it is necessary to keep on record that at the time of hearing the review petition, the case of Ministry of Works vs Helaluddin Ahmed (supra) was cited, but that case was distinguished in the following way:</u>

<u>"The learned Counsel in support of his contention that listing of the property without serving notice as per provision of Ordinance No.54 of 1985 makes the list so made unsustainable in law referred to the case of Ministry of Works vs Helaluddin Ahmed reported in 4 MLR (AD) 140. The fact of the aforesaid case is quite distinguishable from the facts of the instant case and when we drew attention of the learned Counsel to the facts of the case referred by him the learned Counsel felt difficulty to press his contention that the decision reported in the aforementioned law report has application in the facts of the instant case."</u>

127. Therefore, it is obvious that the earlier decisions of this Court on statutory notice creating jurisdiction of the Court of Settlement have not been reconsidered and reviewed. Those judgments still hold the field and those have reached the status of stare decisis.

128. In Sufia Khatoon vs Mahabuba Rahman, 30 BLD (AD) 41 = 62 DLR (AD) 266, this Division has held that a judgment per in curium or a judgment sub silentio does not constitute a precedent. The same view was expressed by the High Court Division in the case of Monju Mia vs Shiraj Mia, 56 DLR 264 in the following: "... It is basic to the rule of precedent that if a later judgment of an apex Court, particularly when given without considering or noticing its earlier decisions on the same issue or point, and comes in conflict or at variance with its earlier' ones, such judgment however latest in time, loses its binding element for being a judgment made per in curium."

<u>129. In view of the consistent view of this Court in the cases as mentioned hereinbefore, find substance in the submission of the learned Counsel for the appellants that a statutory notice is a 'jurisdictional fact' or a 'collateral fact' for inclusion of any property in the `Kha' list published under section 5 of the Ordinance and inclusion of any property in the `Kha' list without issuing notice under clause 1(b) thereof will not give jurisdiction to the Court of Settlement to assume jurisdiction to inquire into the merit of the case. In view of the above, I hold that the enlistment of the property in question in the `Kha' list of the abandoned buildings was illegal and without lawful authority and the High Court Division on misconception of the provisions of section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance read with article 7 of PO 16 of 1972 erroneously held that the enlistment of the property in question in the ' Kha' list without serving notice upon the petitioners was a mere irregularity and for such irregularity "the whole process of inclusion of the property as abandoned property cannot be called in question."</u>

130. The writ petition filed before the High Court Division was a writ in the nature of certiorari. In the case of the Government of Bangladesh vs Md.. Jalil, 48 DLR (AD) 10, it has been held that "The High Court Division was not a Court of appeal required to make determination of facts on its own. It could interfere with the findings of a tribunal of fact under its extra-ordinary jurisdiction under Article 102, only if it could be shown that the tribunal had acted without jurisdiction or made any finding upon no evidence or without considering any material evidence/ facts causing prejudice to the complaining party or that it had acted mala fide or in violation of any principle of natural justice. In the absence of any of these conditions the interference by the High Court Division will itself be an act of without jurisdiction."

<u>131. In the case of Bangladesh, represented by the Ministry of Works vs Nasima Khatoon, 57 DLR (AD) 97, this Division did not interfere with the judgment of the High Court Division which made the Rule Nisi absolute and set aside the decision of the Court of Settlement on the view that "the Court of Settlement did not consider the documents filed by the respondents and while passing the judgment and order did not apply its judicial mind. In this view of the matter, we do not find that the judgment passed by the Court of Settlement is maintainable."</u>

132. As I have found earlier, the Court of Settlement rejected the case of the appellants of CA No. 10 of 2003 on total non-application of mind to their case, non-consideration of the materials placed before it, misreading and misconstruction of some documents and on misconception of the provisions of oral gift under Mohamedan Law and the provisions of article 7 of PO 16 of 1972 and section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance, the High Court Division was quite competent to interfere with the findings and the decision of the Court of Settlement in rejecting the case and thus rejecting the prayer to exclude the property in question from the `Kha' list of the abandoned buildings, but unfortunately the High Court Division discharged the Rule Nisi maintaining those of the Court of Settlement in a mechanical way just reiterating the decision and dittoing the reasoning of the Court of Settlement in a different language without applying its own independent judicial mind in the facts and circumstances of the case and the materials placed before it and again on the mechanical approach that "In writ of certiorari this Court cannot sit over the judgment of the Court of Settlement for reassessing the evidences on record as this court is not a Court of Appeal" and thus erred in law in passing the impugned judgment and order discharging the Rules and as such, the same cannot be sustained and must be interfered with.

133. I have given my anxious thought on the question whether the case be sent back to the Court of Settlement for its decision afresh in view of the fact that the documents in support of the possession of the appellants, particularly, the transferees from Hosne Ara Begum have been filed before this Court, which as it appears from the decision of the Court of Settlement were not filed before it and as such, the Court of Settlement had no chance to consider those, but considering that the cases before the Court of Settlement were filed in 1988 and by now 27 years have elapsed, I do not deem it proper to send the same to the Court of Settlement for another round of legal battle and thus to consume another 20 years if not 27 years. Particularly, in view of my finding that the property in question did not answer the description of an abandoned property within the meaning of article 2(1) of PO 16 of 1972 and the same did not vest in the Government and that the same was enlisted in the `ICha' list illegally and without lawful authority inasmuch as no notice for surrendering or taking over possession thereof as required under section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance was served upon the occupants, I propose to decide the matter finally.

134. Now another pertinent question that looms large for decision is in whose favour order for exclusion of the property in question from the list of abandoned buildings should be passed. I find no difficulty in answering the question in favour of the appellants in CA No.10 of 2003, in view of the finding as to their title and possession therein given hereinbefore. At the same time, I must say that since the parties, namely, the appellants (CA Nos. 10 of 2003 and 77 of 2003) are litigating in the civil Courts as to their claim of title in the property in question in the suits now pending therein ultimate claim of the parties to the property in question shall be decided by the civil Court in the suits now pending between them.

<u>135. In the result, the appeals are allowed. The impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division affirming the decision of the Court of Settlement in Case Nos. 649 of 1988 and 586 of 1988 rejecting the cases is set aside. The cases are allowed. Respondent No. 2 is directed to exclude the building being holding No. 5, Maghbazar (Outer Circular Road), presently 70/71, Outer Circular Road, from the list of abandoned buildings published in the official gazette, additional issue, on 28th April, 1986 in favour of the appellants of CA No.10 of 2003. But this order of exclusion of the property in question from the list of abandoned buildings in favour of the appellants of CA No. 10 of 2003 in no way shall affect the merit of the suits now pending between the parties, i.e. the appellants in the civil Court. The civil Court shall be at liberty to decide the title of the parties on the evidence to be produced by them keeping in mind that the property in question is not an abandoned property and the same did not vest in the Government.</u>

<u>Nazmun Ara Sultana J: I have gone through the judgments prepared by my learned brothers Surendra Kumar Sinha, CJ and Md. Abdul Wahhab Miah, J. I agree with the judgment of my learned brother Md. Abdul Wahhab Miah, J.</u>

<u>Syed Mahmud Hossain J: I have gone through the judgments prepared by my learned brothers Surendra Kumar Sinha, CJ and Md. Abdul Wahhab Miah, J. I agree with the judgment of my learned brother Md. Abdul Wahhab Miah J.</u>

<u>Muhammad Imman Ali J: I have gone through the judgments prepared by my learned brothers Surendra Kumar Sinha, CJ and Md. Abdul Wahhab Miah, J. I agree with the judgment of my learned brother Surendra Kumar Sinha, CJ.</u>

<u>Hasan Foez Siddique J: I have gone through the judgments prepared by my learned brothers Surendra Kumar Sinha, CJ and Md. Abdul Wahhab Miah, J. I agree with the judgment of my learned brother Surendra Kumar Sinha, CJ.</u>

AHM Shamsuddin Choudhury J: I have gone through the judgments prepared by my learned brothers Surendra Kumar Sinha, CJ and Md. Abdul Wahhab Miah, J. I agree with the judgment of my Lord Surendra Kumar Sinha,

Court's Order

Both the Appeals are dismissed by majority decision.

End.

