Gour Gopal Saha, J: This Rule is directed against the judgment and decree dated 26-11-86 (decree drawn on 2-12-86) passed by the learned Subordinate Judge, 4th Court Dhaka in Title Appeal No. 41 of 1985 affirming the judgment and decree dated 12-1-85 (decree drawn on 16-1-85) passed by the learned Munsif Savar in Title Suit No.153 of 1984 dismissing the suit.

2. Maran Mondal, predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners as plaintiff, instituted a suit in the 3rd Court of Munsif Dhaka being Title Suit No. 732 of 1981 subsequently re-numbered as Title Suit No. 153 of 1984 before Munsif. Savar for declaration of his title in the suit land measuring 0.82 acre of nal land as recorded in CS Plot No. 787 under CS Khatian No. 137/24 corresponding to SA Plot No. 198 under SA Khatian No. 198 and RS Plot Nos. 1194 and 1204 under RS Khatian No. 225 of Mouza Barakakar, PS Savar, District Dhaka. The plaintiffs case, in short, is that the suit land originally belonged to Lakshman Mondal, full brother of plaintiff Maran Mondal and the same was correctly recorded in the CS and SA Khatians in the name of Lakshman MondaI. Lakshman Mondal eventually died as a childless widower at his native village Kakabo PS Savar District Dhaka leaving the plaintiff as his only heir to succeed him and since then he has been owning and possessing the suit property peacefully on payment of rent to the Government Acquired Estate. The plaintiff’s further case is that while he has been in rightful possession of the suit property the same has been correctly recorded in his name in the finally published RS Khatian No. 225 following which he has been paying rent to the Government in his own name in respect of the suit property. It was in late 1975 that at the instance of some greedy and unscrupulous persons the defendants illegally tried to treat the suit property as a vested property and threatened to oust him from possession by sheer force and under threats of imminent forcible dispossession he was constrained to pray for yearly lease of the suit property under protest but at the same time he filed an application before the appropriate authority for releasing the suit property from the list of vested property. It has further been contended by the plaintiff that the SDO. Dhaka who is defendant No. 2 in the suit after proper enquiry clearly found in his order dated 5-10-76 Ext. 5 that the original tenant Laksham Mondal had died 15 years ago at his native village Kakabo, Savar leaving plaintiff Maran Mondal as his brother and only heir to succeed him. The learned SDO in his order dated 5-10-76 further found that there was no occasion to treat the suit property as vested property and recommended the release of the suit property from the list of the vested property. The learned ADC (Rev) Dhaka eventually rejected the said recommendation of the SDO Dhaka illegally and arbitrarily and this necessitated the filing of the suit for declaration that the suit property is not vested property and the plaintiff is the absolute owner of the same.

3. The Assistant Custodian Vested and Non-Resident Property (Land and Buildings) and ADC (Rev) Dhaka contested the suit by filing written statements denying the material allegations of the plaint and contended, inter alia, that the recorded tenant Lakshman Mondal left Bangladesh long ago and permanently settled in India as a result of which the suit property has become a vested property by operation of law. It was further contended that since the plaintiff himself took lease of the suit property from the vested property authority and unsuccessfully tried for release of the same from the authority concerned he is estopped from challenging the legality or propriety of the vested property proceedings and, as such, the suit is liable to be dismissed. At the trial the defendant did not appear and contest the suit either by cross-examining the plaintiffs witnesses or by adducing any witness in support of the defence case.

4. The learned Munsif by his impugned judgment dated 12-1-85 dismissed the suit without discussing any evidence oral or documentary. It is evident from the impugned judgment that the learned Munsif dismissed the suit in a most casual manner without discussing and considering any evidence adduced by the plaintiff and the legal incidence of the documents exhibited in the case in support of the plaintiff’s case. It also appears from Ext. 4 and 5 that these do not contain any khatian number but the learned Munsif appears to have discovered a khatian number in the said exhibits, the basis of which is not available on record arid discarded the plaintiff’s case with reference to the baseless khatian purported to have been mentioned therein.

5. Mr SR Karmaker the learned Advocate appearing for the plaintiff-petitioners submits that the learned Court of appeal below seriously erred in law in holding that the suit property is a vested property without any basis at all. The learned Advocate further submits that in the face of cleat assertions by the plaintiff and evidence led to substantiate the same to the effect that his brother Lakhman Mondal never left this country to settle in India and he died at his native village Kakabo leaving the plaintiff as his only heir and since then he has been owning and possessing the suit property and his name has duly been recorded in the finally published RS Khatian and he has been regularly paying rent to the Government Acquired Estate, there is absolutely no basis for treating the suit property as vested property on the basis of a VP Case started in late 1975. The learned Advocate further submits that in the face of the clear finding recorded by defendant No. 2 SDO Dhaka in Ext. 4 that the admitted tenant Lakshman Mondal had died in this country leaving the plaintiff to succeed him as his only heir and in the face of the unchallenged evidence of the plaintiff as PW 1 to the said effect the learned Court of appeal below evidently erred in law in arbitrarily ignoring the said evidence both oral and documentary by illegally shifting the onus of proof regarding the death of Lakshman Mondal and the same has resulted in error in the impugned decision occasioning failure of justice. Mr Karmaker further submits that from Exhibit 4 it is evident that the learned SDO Dhaka who is defendant No. 2 in the suit and himself conducted an enquiry in the VP Case himself found on local enquiry that Lakshman Mondal had died in this country as a citizen of the erstwhile East Pakistan and he never migrated to India and since Lakshman's death plaintiff Moran Mondal has been owing and possessing the suit property on payment of rent to the Government Acquired Estate and on such findings recommended the realse of the suit property from the list of the  vested property. the learned Court of appeal below evidently erred in law in completely ignoring these pieces of material evindence convincingly proving the plaintiffs case and the same has resulted in error in the impugned decision occasioning failure of justice.

6. Mr Karmaker has drawn my attention to Ext. 5 and the order dated 17-8-88 passed by the learned ADC (Rev) Dhaka wherein he called for opinion of the legal Adviser of Vested Properties in respect of release of the suit property from the list of vested properties. It also appears from Ext. 5 that before the opinion of the Legal Adviser of the Vested Property could be obtained as ordered by the learned ADC (Rev) the Superintendent of Vested Properties who is a much lessor officer and subordinate to the SDO could wishfully throwaway the definite recommendation of the SDO for release of the suit property by substituting the satisfaction of the SDO by his own satisfaction without any further material before him and the learned ADC (Rev). Dhaka simply acted mechanically at the bidding of the Superintendent of Vested Properties in rejecting SDO's definite recommendation and positive finding and completely ignoring the legal incidence of the finally published RS Khatian in the name of the plaintiff-Ext. 3 and the Government rent receipts Ext. 2 series in favour of the plaintiff.

7. The learned Advocate appearing for the opposite parties finds it difficult to support the impugned judgments and frankly concedes that in the facts and circumstances of the case and the evidence on record the impugned judgments do not appear to be proper and sustainable in law.

8. In support of his submissions Mr Karmaker has placed before me the case of Abul Khair vs. Bangladesh and others reported in 32 DLR (AD) 29 wherein their Lordships held that before a property could be treated as a vested property the authority concerned must prove that the original tenant migrated to India before the Enemy Property laws came into force in 1965. In the instant case there is absolutely no material on record to prove that Lakshman Mondal migrated to India at any point of time and settled there permanently but on the contrary there is convincing documentary and oral evidence to prove that the admitted tenant Lakshman Mondal had died in this country as its citizen leaving the plaintiff as his only heir to succeed him. The casual exercise made by the defendants in treating the suit property as a vested property without any legal basis whatsoever ostensibly at the instance of an irresponsible Tashilder who is accountable to none and an overzealous Superintendent lightly setting at nought the definite finding and recommendation of the SDO Dhaka must be held to be acts of malfeasance and witch-hunting at the cost of a citizen of the country whose name has duly been recorded in the finally published RS Khatian and from whom rent is being regularly accepted by the Government treating him as a tenant in respect of the suit property.

9. In the face of the SA Khatian standing in the name of Lakshman Mondal and the finally published RS Khatian standing in the name of plaintiff Maran Mondal and the Government regularly accepting rent from the plaintiff treating him as a tenant and there being no material basis and legal foundation for treating the suit property as an enemy property subsequently vested property on the basis of a case started in late 1975 the learned Courts below evidently erred in law in passing the impugned judgments on erroneous view of law.

10. In the present case the plaintiff never abandoned his rights in the suit property and the defendants were never misled by his prayer for taking yearly lease so as to change or alter their position to their detriment and the prayer for temporary lease being obviously under protest and without any prejudice to the rights of the parties the doctrine of estoppel or waiver has no manner of application in the present case. Now here in the whole spectrum of deliberations the learned Courts below appear to have addressed themselves to the vital question as to whether the mere unsubstantiated claim of the vested property authority at the instance of an ever-exuberant and irresponsible Tahsilder whose action is never authenticated by any responsible officer of the Government is sufficient to throw away the unchallenged legal evidence both oral and documentary convincingly proving that the recorded tenant Lakshman Mondal had died in his country as its citizen leaving the plaintiff to succeed him as his only heir and thereby clearly fell in error in deciding the moot question involved in the case by misplacing the onus of proof.

11. It is evident that the instant Vested Property case was started as late as in 1975 and before that time there was no occasion to treat the suit property as vested property. In the absence of any legal foundation whatsoever to treat the suit property as a vested property the whole exercise made in this direction appears to be a malafide and superficial one at the behest of some irresponsible officials unnecessarily landing a citizen of the country and the Government in costly vexacious and oppressive litigations for an unworthy cause. Exts. 4 and 5 from the VP Case in question were admitted into evidence without any objection and, as such, it was absolutely unnecessary for the plaintiff to call for the records of the said VP case for proving the genuineness of Exts 4 and 5. The objection of the learned Court of appeal below on Exts 4 and 5 is totally unwarranted in the facts and circumstances of the case. It is apparent that the learned Court of appeal below totally misconceived the law bearing on the subject and clearly erred in law in discarding the case of the plaintiff who successfully proved his title in the suit property and the baselessness of the Vested Property proceedings in question. On a complete misreading of Ext 3 and 4 the learned trial Court mis-directed itself to find that the land described in the schedule to the plaint is different from that mentioned in Ext. 3 and 4. Unfortunately, the learned Court of appeal below failed to scrutinize Exts 3 and 4 as they deserved and fell in error by committing the same mistake. The misreading and non-reading of the said material evidence has obviously resulted in error in the impugned decision occasioning failure of justice.

12. Mr Karmaker then refers to the case of Nitya Gopal Roy Barman VS. Pran Gopal Nandi and others respond in 32 DLR 11 wherein their Lordships held that a mere claim of the Assistant Custodian that the property of the deceased testator is an enemy property in respect of which an enemy property case was started in 1978 is not sufficient for coming to a conclusion that the property in question is an enemy property. In the instant case the Vested Property case was started as late as in 1975 and the same has been proved to be without any legal foundation and consequently the abortive attempt by the defendants to treat the suit property as a vested property must be held to be illegal and arbitrary.

13. Mr Karmaker also refers to the case of Arun Kumar Lal and others vs. Assistant Custodian of Enemy Property (Land & Buildings) and ADC (Rev) Dhaka reported in 1983 BCR 225 wherein his Lordship found that estoppel cannot operate against a statute. From the facts and circumstances of the case and the evidence on record it is evident that the plaintiff was threatened with dispossession in a summary way by the defendants and it was under the instant threats of forcible dispossession he had to pray for yearly lease of the suit property for saving his possession albeit under protest and lost no time in coming to the Court for vindication of his grievance. Under such circumstances the learned Courts below erred in law in holding that the plaintiffs claim in barred by estoppel.

<u>14. In this connection we may profitably refer to the principle which is incorporated in section 115 of the Evidence Act. The doctrine of estoppel in an equitable postulation which Jays down that if a person has acted to his detriment or altered his position on the basis of any declaration, act or omission of another that other person will not be allowed in any future suit or proceedings between himself and that other person or his representative to go back upon to the detriment of the opposite party. To establish a case of waiver or estoppel it is therefore, necessary to show that the party alleged to have waived his rights had acted in such a manner so as to lead the other side to believe that such rights will not be enforced in the future. Mere indulgence shown under exigency of circumstances in not enforcing one's legal rights or keeping the said rights suspended for the time being cannot constitute waiver or estoppel and give rise to the inference that the rights have been abandoned for all times. In the present case the plaintiff was always diligent in asserting his own title in the suit property and he never abandoned his claim of ownership over it nor the defendants were misled by his prayer for an annual lease so as to change or alter their position to their detriment and the prayer for temporary lease being obviously under protest and without any prejudice to the rights of the parties the doctrine of estoppel or waiver has no manner of application in the present case. The learned Court of appeal below acting on wrong premises evidently erred in law in holding that the suit is barred by estoppel and waiver.</u>

15. The learned Courts below left the field of fact and strayed to fiction by finding fault with the plaintiff for not producing the death certificate of Lakshman Mondal which is not a requirement of law for proving his death particularly when his death was well proved by other convincing and unchallenged evidence. The learned Courts below appear to have approached the case from a totally wrong angle of vision unsupported by the established principles of law and thus misdirected themselves to dismiss the suit on misreading and non-reading of the material evidence on record affecting the merit of the impugned decision.

16. Mr Karmaker then refers to the case of Laxmi Kanta Roy Vs. Upazila Nirbahi Officer and another reported in 46 DLR 136. In this case his Lordship found that since the law of enemy property itself died with the repeal of Ordinance 1 of 1969 on 23-3-1974 no further vested property case can be started thereafter on the basis of the law which is already dead. It is evident that the VP Case in question was started in late 1975 and before that time there was no occasion to treat the suit property as a vested property. In the absence of any legal basis whatsoever to treat the suit property as a vested property, the whole exercise made in this direction appears to be a mala fide and superficial one at the instance of utterly irresponsible officials unnecessarily landing a citizen and the Government in costly and vexatious litigations for an unworthy cause.

<u>17. Order VIII rule 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that assertion of facts made in the plaint if not denied specifically or by necessary implication shall be deemed to be admitted. In our case under review the plaintiff clearly stated in the plaint that Lakshman Mondal had died in this country as a citizen of the erstwhile East Pakistan leaving the plaintiff as his only heir to succeed him and he led evidence to prove the said assertion by the unchallenged oral and documentary evidence and there being no contrary evidence on record the learned Courts below clearly erred in law in dismissing the suit ignoring the positive evidence on record by resorting to hypothetical assumptions and the same has resulted in error in the impugned decision occasioning failure of justice.</u>

<u>18. It may not be out of place to reiterate that laws relating to enemy properties now vested properties which are fairly well-settled by now by the consistent pronouncements by the highest Court of the country properties which assumed enemy character and became enemy properties by operation of law during the relevant time viz from 6-9-65 to 16-2-69 when emergency was formally lifted became vested properties and the Government may treat such properties as enemy or vested properties and take over possession thereof in accordance with law subject to the legitimate rights of co-owners co-sharers and the bonafide transferees in lawful possession therein. But before a property is treated as a vested property particularly on the basis of a VP Case started long after the lifting of emergency on 16th February, 1969 a heavy duty is cast upon the authority concerned to satisfy itself that the recorded tenant migrated to India before 1965 and settled there following which the property in question has really become vested property by conducting necessary enquiry into individual cases rather than relying on the stray noting of a petty Tahsilder who is accountable to none and whose report has never been verified by any responsible officer of the Government. There being as yet no authenticated and published enemy property list the scope for manipulations is wide open till now to unscrupulous officials to include any new property any time in the unending list of enemy property and play like toys with the rights of the citizens whose consequent engagements against the Government in protracted costly and oppressive litigations do not eventually serve any useful purpose either for the Government or for the members of the public the only beneficiaries being some capricious officials and the paraphernalia.</u>

<u>19. When challenged in a Court of law the onus is heavily on the Government to prove affirmatively that the property in question is in fact a vested property failing which some evidence to the contrary adduced by the successors-in-interest of the original tenant or the transferees showing that they are in rightful possession of the disputed properties is sufficient to take the same out of the ambit of enemy property laws. Mere claim by the Government or by the vested property authority that a certain property is a vested property without the necessary factual basis and legal foundation has no validity in the eye of law. The learned Courts below clearly erred in law in passing the impugned judgments ignoring the settled law on the subject.</u>

<u>20. There is yet another special feature of the case which has been overlooked by the learned Courts below. Admittedly the finally published RS Khatian stands in the name of the plaintiff and the Government is regularly accepting rent from him thereby recognising him as the tenant in respect of the suit land. A finally published record of rights revised under section 114A of the SAT Act has a presumption of correctness and that presumption continues till it is otherwise rebutted by reliable evidence. Nothing has been done by the contesting defendants to dispel the legal presumption that attaches to the finally published RS Khatian in the name of the plaintiff. Recognition of the plaintiff as a tenant in respect of the suit property by the Revenue Authority of the Government is binding upon the Vested Property Department and the latter cannot claim the suit land as a vested property summarily discarding the finally published RS Khatian in the name of the plaintiff. The action of the ADC (Revenue) Dhaka who is the de facto head of the Vested Property Department of the District indulging in oppressive litigations must be deprecated. The case of the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Rev) Narayanganj vs. AKM Latiful Karim and others reported in 17 BW (HCD) 249 lends instant support to this view. The impugned judgment cannot be sustainable on that ground as well.</u>

21. For the reasons stated above. I find substance in the submissions made by the learned Advocate for the petitioners and I hold that the impugned judgments suffer from serious legal infirmity and the same have occasioned failure of justice.

In the result, the Rule is made absolute. The impugned judgments are set aside and plaintiffs Title Suit No .153 of 1984 of the Court of Munsif, Savar in Dhaka is hereby decreed. There shall be no order as to costs.

Send down the lower Court records at once.

End.

